<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en"><head>
<title>Inventing the Future: Postcapitalism and a World Without Work</title>
<link href="templateGrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom7220.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head><body><div class="Chapter"><h2 class="chno"><a id="page_69"/><a href="04_ContentsGri1984gorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4"><b>Chapter 4</b></a></h2><h2 class="chaptitle"><a href="04_ContentsGri1984gorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4">Left Modernity</a></h2><blockquote><p class="noindent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart"><i>In the present climate, around the world, almost everything that can be proposed as an alternative will appear to be either utopian or trivial. Thus our programmatic thinking is paralysed</i>.</p><p class="right EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">Roberto Mangabeira Unger</p></blockquote><p class="noindent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">This chapter marks a turning point. From the negative task of diagnosing the strategic limitations of the contemporary left, this chapter begins the positive project of elaborating an escape route from our current condition. In the following chapters, we argue that the contemporary left should reclaim modernity, build a populist and hegemonic force, and mobilise towards a post-work future. Folk-political attempts at prefiguration, direct action and relentless horizontalism are unlikely to achieve this, partly because they misrecognise the nature of their opponent. Capitalism is an aggressively expansive universal, from which efforts to segregate a space of autonomy are bound to fail.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft1" id="ch4ft-1"><sup>1</sup></a> Withdrawal, resistance, localism and autonomous spaces represent a defensive game against an uncompromising and incessantly encroaching capitalism. Moreover, particularisms can easily coexist with capitalist universalism. The innumerable cultural and political variants of capitalism do little to stifle the expansion of commodification, the creation of proletariats, and the imperative of accumulation. The much-lamented capacity of capitalism to incorporate resistance more often than not simply reveals <a id="page_70"/>that particularisms are, in themselves, incapable of competing against a universalism.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft2" id="ch4ft-2"><sup>2</sup></a> Indeed, given neoliberalism&#x2019;s inherently expansionary nature, only an alternative expansionary and inclusive universal of some kind will be able to combat and supersede capitalism on a global scale.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft3" id="ch4ft-3"><sup>3</sup></a> With the dynamics of accumulation at the heart of capital, a non-expansionary capitalism is an oxymoron. An ambitious leftist politics therefore cannot be satisfied with measures to defend localities. It must seek instead to construct a new future-oriented politics capable of challenging capitalism at the largest scales. It must unmask the pseudo-universality of capitalist social relations and recapture the meaning of the future.</p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">This chapter takes a step back from the empirical and historical focus of the earlier chapters, and seeks to elaborate a philosophical ground for the chapters that follow. We argue that a key element of any future-oriented left must be to contest the idea of &#x2018;modernity&#x2019;. Whereas folk-political approaches lack an enticing vision of the future, struggles over modernity have always been struggles over what the future should look like: from the communist modernism of the early Soviet Union to the scientific socialism of postwar social democracy, and on to the sleek neoliberal efficiency of Thatcher and Reagan.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft4" id="ch4ft-4"><sup>4</sup></a> What it means to be modern is not pre-established, but is instead a highly &#x2018;contested field&#x2019;.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft5" id="ch4ft-5"><sup>5</sup></a> Yet, in the face of capitalism&#x2019;s success at universalising itself, this term has been almost fully ceded to the right. &#x2018;Modernisation&#x2019; has come to signify simply some dread combination of privatisation, heightened exploitation, rising inequality and inept managerialism.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft6" id="ch4ft-6"><sup>6</sup></a> Likewise, notions of the future tend to revolve around ideas of ecological apocalypse, the dismantling of the welfare state, or corporate-led dystopia, rather than anything bearing the mark of utopia or universal emancipation. For many, therefore, modernity is simply a cultural expression of capitalism.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft7" id="ch4ft-7"><sup>7</sup></a> From this accepted wisdom, the necessary conclusion follows: only the cancellation of modernity can bring about the end of capitalism. The result has been an anti-modern tendency within numerous social movements from the 1970s onward. Yet this mistaken conflation of modernity with the institutions of capitalism overlooks the alternative forms it can take, and the ways in which many anti-capitalist struggles rely upon its ideals.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft8" id="ch4ft-8"><sup>8</sup></a> Modernity presents both a narrative for popular mobilisation and a philosophical framework for understanding the arc of history. As the term that indexes the direction of society, it must be a key discursive battleground for any leftist politics invested in <a id="page_71"/>creating a better world.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft9" id="ch4ft-9"><sup>9</sup></a> This chapter sets out the broad philosophical stakes of such a project by examining three factors that would help to elaborate a left modernity: an image of historical progress, a universalist horizon and a commitment to emancipation.</p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">In discussing &#x2018;modernity&#x2019;, we face the immediate problem of clarifying what it means. It can refer to a chronological period, typically filtered through European history with a variety of events having been posited as its origin: the Renaissance, the Enlightenment, the French Revolution, the Industrial Revolution.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft10" id="ch4ft-10"><sup>10</sup></a> For others, modernity is defined by a distinct set of practices and institutions: widespread bureaucratisation, a basic framework of liberal democracy, the differentiation of social functions, the colonisation of the non-European world, and the expansion of capitalist social relations. Yet modernity also refers to a repertoire of conceptual innovations revolving around universal ideals of progress, reason, freedom and democracy. This chapter emphasises these latter aspects: modernity names a set of concepts that have been independently developed in numerous cultures across the world, but which took on a particular resonance in Europe. These are the elements of modernity that cannot be renounced, and that form the well-spring from which more popular discourses around modernisation are generated. The conceptual ideals &#x2013; such as freedom, democracy and secularism &#x2013; are the source of both capitalist modernity and the struggles against it. Ideas associated with modernity animated the work of abolitionists, formed the basis of numerous African trade union struggles,<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft11" id="ch4ft-11"><sup>11</sup></a> and continue today in &#x2018;those thousands of campaigns for wages, land rights, basic health, and security, dignity, self-determination, autonomy, and so forth&#x2019;.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft12" id="ch4ft-12"><sup>12</sup></a> In broad terms, then, whether it is explicitly recognised or not, the political struggles of today are struggles <i>within</i> the space of modernity and its ideals. Modernity must be contested, not rejected.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft13" id="ch4ft-13"><sup>13</sup></a></p><p class="sub EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart"><b>HYPERSTITIONAL PROGRESS</b></p><p class="noindent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">To invoke modernity is ultimately to raise the question of the future. What should the future look like? What courses should we set? What does it mean to be contemporary? And whose future is it? Since the emergence of the term, modernity has been concerned with unravelling a circular or retrospective notion of time and introducing a rupture between the present <a id="page_72"/>and the past. With this break, the future is projected as being potentially <i>different from</i> and <i>better than</i> the past.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft14" id="ch4ft-14"><sup>14</sup></a> Modernity is tantamount to &#x2018;the discovery of the future&#x2019; and has therefore found itself intimately linked with notions such as &#x2018;progress, advance, development, emancipation, liberation, growth, accumulation, Enlightenment, embetterment, [and the] avant-garde&#x2019;.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft15" id="ch4ft-15"><sup>15</sup></a> Suggesting that history can progress through deliberate human action, it is the nature of this progress that competing definitions of modernity have struggled over.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft16" id="ch4ft-16"><sup>16</sup></a> Historically, the left has found its natural home in being oriented towards the future. From early communist visions of technological progress, to Soviet space utopias, to the social democratic rhetoric of the &#x2018;white heat of technology&#x2019;, what set the left apart from the right was its unambiguous embrace of the future. The future was to be an improvement over the present in material, social and political terms. By contrast, the forces of the political right were, with a few notable exceptions, defined by their defence of tradition and their essentially reactionary nature.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft17" id="ch4ft-17"><sup>17</sup></a></p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">This situation was reversed during the rise of neoliberalism, with politicians like Thatcher commanding the rhetoric of modernisation and the future to great effect. Co-opting these terms and mobilising them into a new hegemonic common sense, neoliberalism&#x2019;s vision of modernity has held sway ever since. Consequently, discussions of the left in terms of the future now seem aberrant, even absurd. With the postmodern moment, the seemingly intrinsic links between the future, modernity and emancipation were prized apart. Philosophers like Simon Critchley can now confidently assert that &#x2018;we have to resist the idea and ideology of the future, which is always the ultimate trump card of capitalist ideas of progress&#x2019;.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft18" id="ch4ft-18"><sup>18</sup></a> Such folk-political sentiments blindly accept the neoliberal common sense, preferring to shy away from grand visions and replace them with a posturing resistance. From the radical left&#x2019;s discomfort with technological modernity to the social democratic left&#x2019;s inability to envision an alternative world, everywhere today the future has largely been ceded to the right. A skill that the left once excelled at &#x2013; building enticing visions for a better world &#x2013; has deteriorated after years of neglect.</p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">If the left is to recover a sense of progress, however, it cannot simply adopt the classic images of history headed towards a singular destination. Progress, for these approaches, was not only possible, but in fact woven as a necessity into the very fabric of history. Human societies were thought to travel along a pre-defined pathway towards a single outcome modelled after Europe. The <a id="page_73"/>nations of Europe were deemed to have developed capitalist modernity independently, and their historical experiences of development were considered to be both necessary and superior to those of other cultures.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft19" id="ch4ft-19"><sup>19</sup></a> Such ideas dominated traditional European philosophy and continued on in the influential modernisation literature of the 1950s and 1960s, with their attempts to naturalise capitalism against a Soviet opponent.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft20" id="ch4ft-20"><sup>20</sup></a> Partly endorsed by both early Marxism and later Keynesian and neoliberal capitalisms, a one-size-fits-all model of historical progress positioned non-Western societies as lacking and in need of development &#x2013; a position that served to justify colonial and imperial practices.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft21" id="ch4ft-21"><sup>21</sup></a></p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">From the standpoint of their philosophical critics, these notions of progress were disparaged precisely for their belief in preconceived destinations &#x2013; whether in the liberal progression towards capitalist democracy or in the Marxist progression towards communism. The complex and often disastrous record of the twentieth century demonstrated conclusively that history could not be relied upon to follow any predetermined course.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft22" id="ch4ft-22"><sup>22</sup></a> Regression was as likely as progress, genocide as possible as democratisation.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft23" id="ch4ft-23"><sup>23</sup></a> In other words, there was nothing inherent in the nature of history, the development of economic systems, or sequences of political struggle that could guarantee any particular outcome. From a broadly left perspective, for example, even those limited but not insignificant political gains that have been achieved &#x2013; such as welfare provision, women&#x2019;s rights and worker protections &#x2013; can be rolled back. Moreover, even in states where nominally communist governments took power, it proved far more difficult than expected to transition from a capitalist system of production to a fully communist one.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft24" id="ch4ft-24"><sup>24</sup></a> This series of historical experiences fuelled an internal critique of European modernity by way of psychoanalysis, critical theory and poststructuralism. For the thinkers of postmodernism, modernity came to be associated with a credulous naivety.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft25" id="ch4ft-25"><sup>25</sup></a> In Jean-Fran&#x00E7;ois Lyotard&#x2019;s epochal definition, postmodernity was identified as the era that has grown to be suspicious of the grand metanarrative.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft26" id="ch4ft-26"><sup>26</sup></a> On this account, postmodernity is a cultural condition of disillusionment with the kinds of grandiose narratives represented by capitalist, liberal and communist accounts of progress.</p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">To be sure, these critiques capture something important about the chronological texture of our time. And yet, the announcement of the end of grand narratives has often been viewed by those outside Europe as being absolutely <a id="page_74"/>of a piece with modernity.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft27" id="ch4ft-27"><sup>27</sup></a> Further, with the benefit of thirty years&#x2019; hindsight, the broader impact of the cultural condition diagnosed by Lyotard has not been the decline of belief in metanarratives per se, but rather a broad disenchantment with those offered by the left. The association between capitalism and modernisation remains, while properly progressive notions of the future have wilted under postmodern critique and been quashed beneath the social wreckage of neoliberalism. Most significantly, with the collapse of the Soviet Union and the rise of globalisation, history does <i>appear</i> to have a grand narrative.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft28" id="ch4ft-28"><sup>28</sup></a> Throughout the world, markets, wage labour, commodities and productivity-enhancing technologies have all expanded under the systemic imperative to accumulate. Capitalism has become the destiny of contemporary societies, happily coexisting with national differences and paying little heed to clashes between civilisations. But we can draw a distinction here between the endpoint (capitalism) and the pathway towards it. Indeed, the mutual entanglement of countries means that the European pathway (heavily reliant on exploiting colonies and slavery) is barred for many of the newly developing countries. While there are broad paradigms of development, each country has had to find its own unique way to respond to the imperatives of global capitalism. The path of capitalist modernisation is therefore instantiated in different cultures, following different trajectories and with different rhythms of development.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft29" id="ch4ft-29"><sup>29</sup></a> Uneven and combined development is the order of the day.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft30" id="ch4ft-30"><sup>30</sup></a> Progress is therefore not bound to a single European path, but is instead filtered through a variety of political and cultural constellations, all directed towards instantiating capitalist relations. Today, modernisers simply fight over which variant of capitalism to install.</p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">Recuperating the idea of progress under such circumstances means, first and foremost, contesting the dogma of this inevitable endpoint. Capitalist modernity was never a necessary outcome, but instead a successful project driven by various classes and a systemic imperative towards accumulation and expansion. Various modernities are possible, and new visions of the future are essential for the left. Such images are a necessary supplement to any transformative political project. They give a direction to political struggles and generate a set of criteria to adjudicate which struggles to support, which movements to resist, what to invent, and so on. In the absence of images of progress, there can only be reactivity, defensive battles, local resistance and a bunker mentality &#x2013; what we have characterised as folk politics. Visions of the <a id="page_75"/>future are therefore indispensable for elaborating a movement against capitalism. Contra the earlier thinkers of modernity, there is no necessity to progress, nor a singular pathway from which to adjudicate the extent of development. Instead, progress must be understood as <i>hyperstitional</i>: as a kind of fiction, but one that aims to transform itself into a truth. Hyperstitions operate by catalysing dispersed sentiment into a historical force that brings the future into existence. They have the temporal form of &#x2018;will have been&#x2019;. Such hyperstitions of progress form orienting narratives with which to navigate forward, rather than being an established or necessary property of the world. Progress is a matter of political struggle, following no pre-plotted trajectory or natural tendency, and with no guarantee of success. If the supplanting of capitalism is impossible from the standpoint of one or even many defensive stances, it is because any form of prospective politics must set out to construct <i>the new</i>. Pathways of progress must be cut and paved, not merely travelled along in some pre-ordained fashion; they are a matter of political achievement rather than divine or earthly providence.</p><p class="sub EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart"><b>SUBVERSIVE UNIVERSALS</b></p><p class="noindent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">Any elaboration of an alternative image of progress must inevitably face up to the problem of universalism &#x2013; the idea that certain values, ideas and goals may hold across all cultures.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft31" id="ch4ft-31"><sup>31</sup></a> Capitalism, as we have argued, is an expansionary universal that weaves itself through multiple cultural fabrics, reworking them as it goes along. Anything less than a competing universal will end up being smothered by an all-embracing series of capitalist relations.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft32" id="ch4ft-32"><sup>32</sup></a> Various particularisms &#x2013; localised, specific forms of politics and culture &#x2013; cohabitate with ease in the world of capitalism. The list of possibilities continues to grow as capitalism differentiates into Chinese capitalism, American capitalism, Brazilian capitalism, Indian capitalism, Nigerian capitalism, and so on. If defending a particularism is insufficient, it is because history shows us that the global space of universalism is a space of conflict, with each contender requiring the relative provincialisation of its competitors.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft33" id="ch4ft-33"><sup>33</sup></a> If the left is to compete with global capitalism, it needs to rethink the project of universalism.</p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">But to invoke such an idea is to call forth a number of fundamental critiques directed against universalism in recent decades. While a universal <a id="page_76"/>politics must move beyond any local struggles, generalising itself at the global scale and across cultural variations, it is for these very reasons that it has been criticised.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft34" id="ch4ft-34"><sup>34</sup></a> As a matter of historical record, European modernity was inseparable from its &#x2018;dark side&#x2019; &#x2013; a vast network of exploited colonial dominions, the genocide of indigenous peoples, the slave trade, and the plundering of colonised nations&#x2019; resources.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft35" id="ch4ft-35"><sup>35</sup></a> In this conquest, Europe presented itself as embodying the universal way of life. All other peoples were simply residual particulars that would inevitably come to be subsumed under the European way &#x2013; even if this required ruthless physical violence and cognitive assault to guarantee the outcome. Linked to this was a belief that the universal was equivalent to the homogeneous. Differences between cultures would therefore be erased in the process of particulars being subsumed under the universal, creating a culture modelled in the image of European civilisation. This was a universalism indistinguishable from pure chauvinism. Throughout this process, Europe dissimulated its own parochial position by deploying a series of mechanisms to efface the subjects who made these claims &#x2013; white, heterosexual, property-owning males. Europe and its intellectuals abstracted away from their location and identity, presenting their claims as grounded in a &#x2018;view from nowhere&#x2019;.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft36" id="ch4ft-36"><sup>36</sup></a> This perspective was taken to be untarnished by racial, sexual, national or any other particularities, providing the basis for both the alleged universality of Europe&#x2019;s claims and the illegitimacy of other perspectives. While Europeans could speak and embody the universal, other cultures could only be represented as particular and parochial. Universalism has therefore been central to the worst aspects of modernity&#x2019;s history.</p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">Given this heritage, it might seem that the simplest response would be to rescind the universal from our conceptual arsenal. But, for all the difficulties with the idea, it nevertheless remains necessary. The problem is partly that one cannot simply reject the concept of the universal without generating other significant problems. Most notably, giving up on the category leaves us with nothing but a series of diverse particulars. There appears no way to build meaningful solidarity in the absence of some common factor. The universal also operates as a transcendent ideal &#x2013; never satisfied with any particular embodiment, and always open to striving for better.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft37" id="ch4ft-37"><sup>37</sup></a> It contains the conceptual impulse to undo its own limits. Rejecting this category also risks Orientalising other cultures, transforming them into an exotic Other. If there <a id="page_77"/>are only particularisms, and provincial Europe is associated with reason, science, progress and freedom, then the unpleasant implication is that non-Western cultures must be devoid of these. The old Orientalist divides are inadvertently sustained in the name of a misguided anti-universalism. On the other hand, one risks licensing all sorts of oppressions as simply the inevitable consequence of plural cultural forms. All the problems of cultural relativism reappear if there are no criteria to discern <i>which</i> global knowledges, politics and practices support a politics of emancipation. Given all of this, it is unsurprising to see aspects of universalism pop up throughout history and across cultures,<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft38" id="ch4ft-38"><sup>38</sup></a> to see even its critics begrudgingly accept its necessity,<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft39" id="ch4ft-39"><sup>39</sup></a> and to see a variety of attempts to revise the category.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft40" id="ch4ft-40"><sup>40</sup></a></p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">To maintain this necessary conceptual tool, the universal must be identified not with an established set of principles and values, but rather with an empty placeholder that is impossible to fill definitively. Universals emerge when a particular comes to occupy this position through hegemonic struggle:<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft41" id="ch4ft-41"><sup>41</sup></a> the particular (&#x2018;Europe&#x2019;) comes to represent itself as the universal (&#x2018;global&#x2019;). It is not simply a false universal, though, as there is a mutual contamination: the universal becomes embodied in the particular, while the particular loses some of its specificities in functioning as the universal. Yet there can never be a fully achieved universalism, and universals are therefore always open to contestation from other universals. This is what we will later outline in politico-strategic terms as counter-hegemony &#x2013; a project aimed at subverting an existing universalism in favour of a new order. This leads us to our second point &#x2013; as counter-hegemonic, universals can have a subversive and liberating strategic function. On the one hand, a universal makes an unconditional demand &#x2013; everything must be placed under its rule.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft42" id="ch4ft-42"><sup>42</sup></a> Yet, on the other hand, universalism is never an achieved project (even capitalism remains incomplete). This tension renders any established hegemonic structure open to contestation and enables universals to function as insurrectionary vectors against exclusions. For example, the concept of universal human rights, problematic as it may be, has been put to use by numerous movements, ranging from local housing struggles to international justice for war crimes. Its universal and unconditional demand has been mobilised in order to highlight those who are left out of its protections and rights. Similarly, feminists have criticised certain concepts as exclusionary of women and mobilised universal claims against their constraints, as in the use <a id="page_78"/>of the universal idea that &#x2018;all humans are equal&#x2019;. In such cases, the particular (&#x2018;woman&#x2019;) becomes a way to prosecute a critique against an existing universal (&#x2018;humanity&#x2019;). Meanwhile, the previously established universal (&#x2018;humanity&#x2019;) becomes revealed as a particular (&#x2018;man&#x2019;).<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft43" id="ch4ft-43"><sup>43</sup></a> These examples show that universals can be revitalised by the struggles that both challenge and elucidate them. In this regard, &#x2018;to appeal to universalism as a way of asserting the superiority of Western culture is to betray universality, but to appeal to universalism as a way of dismantling the superiority of the West is to realize it&#x2019;.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft44" id="ch4ft-44"><sup>44</sup></a> Universalism, on this account, is the product of politics, not a transcendent judge standing above the fray.</p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">We can turn now to one final aspect of universalism, which is its heterogeneous nature.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft45" id="ch4ft-45"><sup>45</sup></a> As capitalism makes clear, universalism does not entail homogeneity &#x2013; it does not necessarily involve converting diverse things into the same kind of thing. In fact, the power of capitalism is precisely its versatility in the face of changing conditions on the ground and its capacity to accommodate difference. A similar prospect must also hold for any leftist universal &#x2013; it must be one that integrates difference rather than erasing it. What then does all of this mean for the project of modernity? It means that any particular image of modernity must be open to co-creation, and further transformation and alteration. And in a globalised world where different peoples necessarily co-exist, it means building systems to live in common despite the plurality of ways of life. Contrary to Eurocentric accounts and classic images of universalism, it must recognise the agency of those outside Europe, and the necessity of their voices in building truly planetary and universal futures. The universal, then, is an empty placeholder that hegemonic particulars (specific demands, ideals and collectives) come to occupy. It can operate as a subversive and emancipatory vector of change with respect to established universalisms, and it is heterogeneous and includes differences, rather than eliminating them.</p><p class="sub EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart"><b>SYNTHETIC FREEDOM</b></p><p class="noindent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">While the left has traditionally been associated with ideals of equality (manifested today in the focus on income and wealth inequalities), we believe that freedom is an equally essential principle of left modernity. This concept has been central to the political battles fought throughout the twentieth century, <a id="page_79"/>with the United States routinely posing as &#x2018;the free world&#x2019; against a totalitarian enemy (in the figure of the USSR, and then the increasingly incoherent images of &#x2018;Islamofascism&#x2019;). In these hegemonic battles, capitalism has repeatedly asserted its superiority by upholding an idea of <i>negative freedom</i>.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft46" id="ch4ft-46"><sup>46</sup></a> This is the freedom of individuals from arbitrary interference by other individuals, collectives and institutions (paradigmatically, the state). Negative freedom&#x2019;s insistence on the absence of interference has made it an ideal tool to wield against purportedly totalitarian opponents, yet it is a woefully emaciated concept of freedom. In practice, it translates into a modicum of political freedom from the state (ever less so in an age of digital spying and the war on terror) and the economic freedoms to sell our labour power and to choose between shiny new consumer goods.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft47" id="ch4ft-47"><sup>47</sup></a> Under negative freedom, the rich and the poor are considered equally free, despite the obvious differences in their capacities to act.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft48" id="ch4ft-48"><sup>48</sup></a> Negative freedom is entirely compatible with mass poverty, starvation, homelessness, unemployment and inequality. It is also entirely compatible with our desires being manufactured and designed by pervasive advertising. Against this limited concept of freedom, we argue for a much more substantial version.</p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">Whereas negative freedom is concerned with assuring the formal right to avoid interference, &#x2018;synthetic freedom&#x2019; recognises that a formal right without a material capacity is worthless.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft49" id="ch4ft-49"><sup>49</sup></a> Under a democracy, for example, we are all formally free to run for political leadership. But without the financial and social resources to run a campaign, this is a meaningless freedom. Equally, we are all formally free to not take a job, but most of us are nevertheless practically forced into accepting whatever is on offer.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft50" id="ch4ft-50"><sup>50</sup></a> In either case, various options may be theoretically available, but for all practical purposes are off the table. This reveals the significance of having the means to realise a formal right, and it is this emphasis on the means and capacities to act that is crucial for a leftist approach to freedom. As Marx and Engels wrote, &#x2018;it is possible to achieve real liberation only in the real world and by real means&#x2019;.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft51" id="ch4ft-51"><sup>51</sup></a> Understood in this way, freedom and power become intertwined. If power is the basic capacity to produce intended effects in someone or something else,<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft52" id="ch4ft-52"><sup>52</sup></a> then an increase in our ability to carry out our desires is simultaneously an increase in our freedom. The more capacity we have to act, the freer we are. One of the biggest indictments of capitalism is that it enables the freedom to act for only a vanishingly small few. A primary aim of a postcapitalist world would <a id="page_80"/>therefore be to maximise synthetic freedom, or in other words, to enable the flourishing of all of humanity and the expansion of our collective horizons.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft53" id="ch4ft-53"><sup>53</sup></a> Achieving this involves at least three different elements: the provision of the basic necessities of life, the expansion of social resources, and the development of technological capacities.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft54" id="ch4ft-54"><sup>54</sup></a> Taken together, these form a synthetic freedom that is constructed rather than natural, a collective historical achievement rather than the result of simply leaving people be. Emancipation is thus not about detaching from the world and liberating a free soul, but instead a matter of constructing and cultivating the right attachments.</p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">In the first place, synthetic freedom entails the maximal provision of the basic resources needed for a meaningful life: things like income, time, health and education. Without these resources, most people are left <i>formally</i> but not <i>really</i> free. Understood in this way, rising global inequality is revealed as an equally massive disparity in freedom. One initial step in resolving this is the classic social democratic goal of providing the common goods of society, such as healthcare, housing, childcare, education, transport and internet access.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft55" id="ch4ft-55"><sup>55</sup></a> The liberal idea in which these basic necessities of life are supposedly enhanced by freedom of choice in the market ignores the actual (financial and cognitive) burdens involved in making such choices.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft56" id="ch4ft-56"><sup>56</sup></a> In a world of synthetic freedom, high-quality public goods would be provided for us, leaving us to get on with our lives rather than worrying about which healthcare provider to go with. Beyond the social democratic imagination, however, lie two further essentials of existence: time and money. Free time is the basic condition for self-determination and the development of our capacities.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft57" id="ch4ft-57"><sup>57</sup></a> Equally, synthetic freedom demands the provision of a basic income to all in order for them to be fully free.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft58" id="ch4ft-58"><sup>58</sup></a> Such a policy not only provides the monetary resources for living under capitalism, but also makes possible an increase in free time. It provides us with the capacity to choose our lives: we can experiment and build unconventional lives, choosing to foster our cultural, intellectual and physical sensibilities instead of blindly working to survive.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft59" id="ch4ft-59"><sup>59</sup></a> Time and money therefore represent key components of freedom in any substantive sense.</p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">A full image of synthetic freedom must also seek to expand our capacities beyond what is currently possible. If it is to avoid the problem of manipulating people into contentment with the status quo, synthetic freedom must be open to whatever people might desire.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft60" id="ch4ft-60"><sup>60</sup></a> That is to say, freedom cannot simply <a id="page_81"/>be equated with making existing options viable, but instead must be open to the largest possible set of options. In this, collective resources are essential.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft61" id="ch4ft-61"><sup>61</sup></a> Processes of social reasoning, for instance, can enable common understandings of the world, creating a &#x2018;we&#x2019; in the process that has much greater powers to act than individuals alone.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft62" id="ch4ft-62"><sup>62</sup></a> Equally, language is effectively cognitive scaffolding that enables us to leverage symbolic thought to expand our horizons.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft63" id="ch4ft-63"><sup>63</sup></a> The development, deepening and expansion of knowledge enable us to imagine and achieve capacities that are otherwise unattainable. As we acquire technical knowledge of our built environment and scientific knowledge of the natural world, and come to understand the fluid tendencies of the social world, we gain greater powers to act. As Louis Althusser put it,</p><div class="block"><p class="noindent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">Just as knowledge of the laws of light has never prevented men from seeing &#x2026; so knowledge of the laws that govern the development of societies does not prevent men from living, or take the place of labour, love and struggle. On the contrary: knowledge of the laws of light has produced the glasses which have transformed men&#x2019;s sight, just as knowledge of the laws of social development has given rise to endeavours which have transformed and enlarged the horizon of human existence.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft64" id="ch4ft-64"><sup>64</sup></a></p></div><p class="noindent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">The anti-intellectualism that permeates the political right, and increasingly infects the critical left, is therefore a retrogression of the worst kind. Healthy scepticism is transformed into an abdication of our commitments to expand freedom. This retrogression in relation to knowledge also occurs in the fantasies of immediate and unbound freedoms in practice. The voluntaristic image that sees mediations, institutions and abstractions as opposed to freedom simply confuses the absence of artifice with the full expression of freedom. Needless to say, this is misguided. Collective action, with its expansion of synthetic freedom, is more often than not carried out through complex divisions of labour, mediated chains of engagement and abstract institutional structures. The social aspect of synthetic freedom is therefore not a return to some human desire for face-to-face sociality and simple cooperation, but instead a call for collective, complex and mediated self-determination.</p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">Finally, if we are to expand our capacities to act, the development of technology must play a central role. As has always been the case, &#x2018;technology is the source of our options [and] options are the basis of a future that keeps us <a id="page_82"/>above the level of pawn&#x2019;.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft65" id="ch4ft-65"><sup>65</sup></a> Our level of freedom is highly dependent upon the historical conditions of scientific and technological development.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft66" id="ch4ft-66"><sup>66</sup></a> The artifices that emerge from these fields both expand existing capacities for action and create entirely new ones in the process. The full development of synthetic freedom therefore requires a reconfiguration of the material world in accordance with the drive to expand our capacities for action. It demands experimentation with collective and technological augmentation, and a spirit that refuses to accept any barrier as natural and inevitable.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft67" id="ch4ft-67"><sup>67</sup></a> Cyborg augmentations, artificial life, synthetic biology and technologically mediated reproduction are all examples of this elaboration.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft68" id="ch4ft-68"><sup>68</sup></a> The overall aim must therefore be picked out as an unrelenting project to unbind the necessities of this world and transform them into materials for the further construction of freedom.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft69" id="ch4ft-69"><sup>69</sup></a> Such an image of emancipation can never be satisfied with or condensed into a static society, but will instead continually strain beyond any limitations. Freedom is a synthetic enterprise, not a natural gift.</p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">Underlying this idea of emancipation is a vision of humanity as a transformative and constructible hypothesis: one that is built through theoretical and practical experimentation and elaboration.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft70" id="ch4ft-70"><sup>70</sup></a> There is no authentic human essence to be realised, no harmonious unity to be returned to, no unalienated humanity obscured by false mediations, no organic wholeness to be achieved. Alienation is a mode of enablement, and humanity is an incomplete vector of transformation. What we are and what we can become are open-ended projects to be constructed in the course of time. As Sadie Plant puts it,</p><div class="block"><p class="noindent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">It&#x2019;s always been problematic to talk about the liberation of women because that presupposes that we know what women are. If both women and men have been organised into the forms we currently take, then we don&#x2019;t want to liberate what we are now, if you see what I mean &#x2026; It&#x2019;s not a question of liberation so much as a question of evolution &#x2013; or engineering. There&#x2019;s a gradual re-engineering of what it can be to be a woman and we don&#x2019;t yet know what it is. We have to find out.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft71" id="ch4ft-71"><sup>71</sup></a></p></div><p class="noindent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">What must therefore be articulated is a humanism that is not defined in advance. This is a project of self-realisation, but one without a pre-established endpoint.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft72" id="ch4ft-72"><sup>72</sup></a> It is only through undergoing the process of revision and <a id="page_83"/>construction that humanity can come to know itself. This means revising the human both theoretically and practically, engaging in new modes of being and new forms of sociality as practical ramifications of making &#x2018;the human&#x2019; explicit.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft73" id="ch4ft-73"><sup>73</sup></a> It is to undertake an interventionist approach to the human that is opposed to those humanisms that protect a parochial image of the human at all costs.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft74" id="ch4ft-74"><sup>74</sup></a> These interventions range from individual bodily experimentation to collective political mobilisations against restricted images of the human, and everything in between.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft75" id="ch4ft-75"><sup>75</sup></a> It means liberating ourselves from the decrepit economic image of humanity that capitalist modernity has installed, and inventing a new humanity. Emancipation, under this vision, would therefore mean increasing the capacity of humanity to act according to whatever its desires might become. And universal emancipation would be the insistent and maximal extension of this goal to the entirety of our species. It is in this sense that universal emancipation lies at the heart of a modern left.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft76" id="ch4ft-76"><sup>76</sup></a></p><p class="indent EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">We have seen that, without a conception of the future, the left becomes bound to a defence of tradition, and to protecting bunkers of resistance. What, then, would a left modernity look like? It would be one that offered enticing and expansive visions of a better future. It would operate with a universal horizon, mobilise a substantial concept of freedom, and make use of the most advanced technologies in order to achieve its emancipatory goals. Rather than a Eurocentric view of the future, it would rely upon a global set of voices articulating and negotiating in practice what a common and plural future might be. Whether operating through slave revolts, workers&#x2019; struggles, anti-colonial uprisings or women&#x2019;s movements, the critics of sedimented universalisms have always been essential agents in modernity&#x2019;s construction of the future; they are the ones who have continually revised, revolted and created a &#x2018;universalism from below&#x2019;.<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#ch4ft77" id="ch4ft-77"><sup>77</sup></a> Yet to truly enable the liberation of futures in the plural, the current global order premised on waged labour and capitalist accumulation will need to be transcended first. A left modernity will, in other words, require building a postcapitalist and post-work platform upon which multiple ways of living could emerge and flourish. The next two chapters will set out both the necessity and desirability of this particular vision of the future.<a id="page_84"/></p></div><p style="font-size: 11px; text-align: center; color: #666; border-top: 1px solid #9a9a9a; padding: 15px 0 0; margin: 50px 0 0;" class="EPubfirstparagraph EpubpagerStart">This eBook is licensed to Grigor Malo, grigormalo@gmail.com on 03/31/2016</p></body></html>
