<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en"><head>
<title>Inventing the Future: Postcapitalism and a World Without Work</title>
<link href="templateGrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom7220.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>    <body><div class="Chapter1"><h2 class="toc-head"><a id="page_185"/><a href="04_ContentsGri1984gorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#notes">Notes</a></h2> <p class="sub"><b>INTRODUCTION</b></p>    <p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="06_IntroGrigorMalogrigormalogmailco8298m.xhtml#introft-1" id="introft1">1</a>.</span>John Maynard Keynes, &#x2018;Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren&#x2019;, in <i>Essays in Persuasion</i> (New York: W. W. Norton &#x0026; Co., 1963); George Young, <i>The Russian Cosmists: The Esoteric Futurism of Nikolai Fedorov and His Followers</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012); Mark Dery, &#x2018;Black to the Future: Interviews with Samuel R. Delany, Greg Tate, and Tricia Rose&#x2019;, in Mark Dery, ed., <i>Flame Wars: The Discourse of Cyberculture</i> (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1994); Shulamith Firestone, <i>The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution</i> (New York: Morrow, 1970).</p> <p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="06_IntroGrigorMalogrigormalogmailco8298m.xhtml#introft-2" id="introft2">2</a>.</span>For exemplars of this stance, see Franco Berardi, <i>After the Future</i> (Edinburgh: AK Press, 2011); T. J. Clark, &#x2018;For a Left with No Future&#x2019;, <i>New Left Review</i> II/74 (March&#x2013;April 2012); Fernando Coronil, &#x2018;The Future in Question: History and Utopia in Latin America (1989&#x2013;2010)&#x2019;, in Craig Calhoun and Georgi Derluguian, eds, <i>Business as Usual: The Roots of the Global Financial Meltdown</i> (New York: New York University Press, 2011). Or, in the words of one popular recent essay: &#x2018;The future has no future&#x2019;: The Invisible Committee, <i>The Coming Insurrection</i> (Los Angeles: Semiotext(e), 2009), p. 23.</p>    <p class="sub"><b>1. OUR POLITICAL COMMON SENSE:<br/>INTRODUCING FOLK POLITICS</b></p> <p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-1" id="ch1ft1">1</a>.</span>Dave Mitchell, &#x2018;Stuff White People Smash,&#x2019; <i>Rabble</i>, 26 June 2011, at <a href="http://rabble.ca">rabble.ca</a>.</p>    <p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-2" id="ch1ft2">2</a>.</span>It is telling that the main reason for the failure of the ongoing Doha Round negotiations at the WTO is because of divisions between states, rather than any social movement resistance.</p> <p class="note1"><a id="page_186"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-3" id="ch1ft3">3</a>.</span>Insight into some of the internal debates within Occupy around the issue of demands can be found in Astra Taylor and Keith Gessen, eds, <i>Occupy! Scenes from Occupied America</i> (London: Verso, 2011). For a detailed critique of the &#x2018;no demands&#x2019; position, see Marco Desiriis and Jodi Dean, &#x2018;A Movement Without Demands?&#x2019;, <i>Possible Futures</i>, 3 January 2012, at <a href="http://possible-futures.org">possible-futures.org</a>.</p>    <p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-4" id="ch1ft4">4</a>.</span>Zach Schwartz-Weinstein, &#x2018;Not Your Academy: Occupation and the Future of Student Struggles&#x2019;, in A. J. Bauer, Christina Beltran, Rana Jaleel and Andrew Ross, eds, <i>Is This What Democracy Looks Like?</i>, Social Text E-Book, 2012, at <a href="http://what-democracy-looks-like.com">what-democracy-looks-like.com</a>. For a piece that tracks the diminishing importance of concrete demands over time within a single student occupation at University College London in 2010, see Guy Aitchison, &#x2018;Reform, Rupture, or Re-Imagination: Understanding the Purpose of an Occupation&#x2019;, <i>Social Movement Studies</i> 10: 4 (2011), pp. 431&#x2013;9.</p> <p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-5" id="ch1ft5">5</a>.</span>Hakim Bey&#x2019;s work is perhaps the most infamous example of this self-sufficiency of the autonomous protest. See Hakim Bey, <i>TAZ: The Temporary Autonomous Zone, Ontological Anarchy, Poetic Terrorism</i>, 2nd rev. edn. (Brooklyn: Autonomedia, 2011). See also Jeremy Gilbert, <i>Anti-Capitalism and Culture: Radical Theory and Popular Politics</i> (Oxford/New York: Berg, 2008), pp. 203&#x2013;9, for a comprehensive critique from within the social movement space of the dangers of &#x2018;the activist imaginary&#x2019;.</p>    <p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-6" id="ch1ft6">6</a>.</span>Linda Polman, <i>The Crisis Caravan: What&#x2019;s Wrong with Humanitarian Aid?</i> (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2010).</p>     <p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-7" id="ch1ft7">7</a>.</span>Radix, &#x2018;Fracking Sussex: The Threat of Shale Oil &#x0026; Gas&#x2019;, <i>Frack Off</i>, 2013, at <a href="http://frack-off.org.uk">frack-off.org.uk</a>. In fact, the most successful force to stop fracking has been the market, with the recent drop in crude oil prices.</p>    <p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-8" id="ch1ft8">8</a>.</span>Eviction Free Zone, &#x2018;Direct Action, Occupy Wall Street, and the Future of Housing Justice: An Interview with Noam Chomsky&#x2019;, 2013, at <a href="http://libcom.org">libcom.org</a>.</p>    <p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-9" id="ch1ft9">9</a>.</span>Adam Gabbatt, &#x2018;Occupy Wall Street Activists Buy $15m of Americans&#x2019; Personal Debt&#x2019;, <i>Guardian</i>, 12 November 2013.</p>    <p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-10" id="ch1ft10">10</a>.</span>Paul Mason, <i>Live Working or Die Fighting: How the Working Class Went Global</i> (London: Vintage, 2008).</p>   <p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-11" id="ch1ft11">11</a>.</span>Stephen Stich, <i>From Folk Psychology to Cognitive Science: The Case Against Belief</i> (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1983); Patricia Churchland, <i>Neurophilosophy: Towards a Unified Science of the Mind&#x2013;Brain</i> (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986). While we want to draw a somewhat loose analogy with the neurophilosophical tradition here, we do not mean to argue that folk politics is in any sense <i>grounded</i> in folk psychology. Rather, our critique of it is similarly focused on the notion that the appearance of phenomena is both necessary and deceptive as to the reality of how a system operates.</p>    <p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-12" id="ch1ft12">12</a>.</span>For a history of these &#x2018;repertoires of contention&#x2019;, see Charles Tilly, <i>Social Movements, 1768&#x2013;2004</i> (Boulder, CA: Paradigm, 2004).</p>       <p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-13" id="ch1ft13">13</a>.</span>James Doward, Tracy McVeigh, Mark Townsend and Matthew Taylor, &#x2018;March for the Alternative Sends a Noisy Message to the Government&#x2019;, <i>Guardian</i>, 26 March 2011.</p>    <p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-14" id="ch1ft14">14</a>.</span>Liza Featherstone, Doug Henwood and Christian Parenti, &#x2018;Left Anti- Intellectualism and Its Discontents&#x2019;, in Eddie Yuen, George Katsiaficas and Daniel Burton Rose, <a id="page_187"/>eds, <i>Confronting Capitalism: Dispatches from a Global Movement</i> (New York: Soft Skull, 2004).</p>          <p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-15" id="ch1ft15">15</a>.</span>Bey, <i>TAZ</i>.</p>    <p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-16" id="ch1ft16">16</a>.</span>Paul Davidson, <i>The Keynes Solution: The Path to Global Economic Prosperity</i> (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009).</p>          <p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-17" id="ch1ft17">17</a>.</span>The Invisible Committee, <i>The Coming Insurrection</i> (Los Angeles, CA/Cambridge, MA: Semiotext(e), distributed by the MIT Press, 2009).</p>    <p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-18" id="ch1ft18">18</a>.</span>Greg Sharzer, <i>No Local: Why Small-Scale Alternatives Won&#x2019;t Change the World</i> (Winchester: Zero, 2012).</p>          <p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-19" id="ch1ft19">19</a>.</span>Ernst Schumacher, <i>Small Is Beautiful: Economics as if People Mattered</i> (New York: Harper &#x0026; Row, 1973).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-20" id="ch1ft20">20</a>.</span>Taylor and Gessen, <i>Occupy!</i>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-21" id="ch1ft21">21</a>.</span>Richard J. F. Day, <i>Gramsci Is Dead: Anarchist Currents in the Newest Social Movements</i> (London: Pluto, 2005); Jon Beasley-Murray, <i>Posthegemony: Political Theory and Latin America</i> (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-22" id="ch1ft22">22</a>.</span>Justin Healey, <i>Ethical Consumerism</i> (Thirroul, NSW: Spinney, 2013).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-23" id="ch1ft23">23</a>.</span>James Ladyman, James Lambert and Karoline Wiesner, &#x2018;What Is a Complex System?&#x2019; <i>European Journal for Philosophy of Science</i> 3: 1 (2013), pp. 33&#x2013;67.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-24" id="ch1ft24">24</a>.</span>Susan Buck-Morss, &#x2018;Envisioning Capital: Political Economy on Display&#x2019;, <i>Critical Inquiry</i> 21: 2 (1995), pp. 434&#x2013;67.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-25" id="ch1ft25">25</a>.</span>Fredric Jameson, &#x2018;Cognitive Mapping&#x2019;, in C. Nelson and L. Grossberg, eds, <i>Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture</i> (Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1990).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-26" id="ch1ft26">26</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 356.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-27" id="ch1ft27">27</a>.</span>Schumacher, <i>Small Is Beautiful</i>; Carl Honor&#x00E9;, <i>In Praise of Slow: Challenging the Cult of Speed</i> (New York: HarperSanFrancisco, 2005).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-28" id="ch1ft28">28</a>.</span>Rosa Luxemburg, <i>The Essential Rosa Luxemburg: Reform or Revolution and the Mass Strike</i>, ed. Helen Scott (Chicago: Haymarket, 2008), p. 68.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-29" id="ch1ft29">29</a>.</span>Friedrich Hayek, <i>The Road to Serfdom</i> (London: Routledge, 1962); and &#x2018;The Theory of Complex Phenomena&#x2019;, in Michael Martin and Lee McIntyre, eds, <i>Readings in the Philosophy of Social Science</i> (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1964).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-30" id="ch1ft30">30</a>.</span>This is the question at the heart of the socialist calculation debate. See Oskar Lange and Fred M. Taylor, <i>On the Economic Theory of Socialism</i> (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964); Fikret Adaman and Pat Devine, &#x2018;The Economics Calculation Debate: Lessons for Socialists&#x2019;, <i>Cambridge Journal of Economics</i> 20: 5 (September 1996); Allin Cottrell and Paul Cockshott, &#x2018;Calculation, Complexity and Planning: The Socialist Calculation Debate Once Again&#x2019;, <i>Review of Political Economy</i> 5: 1 (1993).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-31" id="ch1ft31">31</a>.</span>It is important to note here that &#x2018;the left&#x2019; is an ultimately artificial if useful term, used to describe an incredibly diverse and potentially contradictory set of political and social forces. For a full discussion of the origins of the left/right distinction in post-revolutionary France, see Marcel Gauchet, &#x2018;Right and Left&#x2019;, in Lawrence Kritzman, ed., <i>Realms of Memory: Conflicts and Divisions</i> (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997). As a point of clarification, we consider &#x2018;the left&#x2019; today in the broadest sense to consist of the following movements, positions and organisations: democratic socialism, communism, anarchism, left-libertarianism, anti-imperialism, anti-fascism, anti-racism, anti-capitalism, feminism, autonomism, trade unionism, queer <a id="page_188"/>politics, and large sections of the green movement, among many groups allied or hybridised with the above. Any consistency these forces might have is a matter of political construction and articulation, rather than being in any sense natural or pre-given.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-32" id="ch1ft32">32</a>.</span>Gerassimos Moschonas, <i>In the Name of Social Democracy: The Great Transformation, 1945 to the Present</i>, translated by Gregory Elliott (London: Verso, 2002), pp. 15&#x2013;17; John Gerard Ruggie, &#x2018;International Regimes, Transactions, and Change: Embedded Liberalism in the Postwar Economic Order&#x2019;, <i>International Organization</i> 36: 2 (1982).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-33" id="ch1ft33">33</a>.</span>After the demise of 1968, there was a brief reassertion of more classical Leninist and Maoist revolutionary thought. Yet these attempts to double down on traditional methods of organising remained numerically marginal and suffered eventual failure. For a history of this moment in America, see Max Elbaum, <i>Revolution in the Air: Sixties Radicals Turn to Lenin, Mao and Che</i> (London: Verso, 2006).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-34" id="ch1ft34">34</a>.</span>Moschonas, <i>In the Name of Social Democracy</i>, pp. 35&#x2013;6.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-35" id="ch1ft35">35</a>.</span>For an early feminist critique of these modes of organising, see Jo Freeman, <i>The Tyranny of Structurelessness</i>, 1970, at <a href="http://struggle.ws">struggle.ws</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-36" id="ch1ft36">36</a>.</span>Martin Klimke and Joachim Scharloth, eds, <i>1968 in Europe: A History of Protest and Activism, 1956&#x2013;77</i> (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-37" id="ch1ft37">37</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 5.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-38" id="ch1ft38">38</a>.</span>Giovanni Arrighi, Terrence Hopkins and Immanuel Wallerstein, <i>Antisystemic Movements</i> (London/New York: Verso, 1989), pp. 45&#x2013;7.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-39" id="ch1ft39">39</a>.</span>Ibid.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-40" id="ch1ft40">40</a>.</span>Peter Starr, <i>Logics of Failed Revolt: French Theory After May &#x2019;68</i> (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1995).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-41" id="ch1ft41">41</a>.</span>Grant Kester, &#x2018;Lessons in Futility: Francis Al&#x00FF;s and the Legacy of May &#x2019;68&#x2019;, <i>Third Text</i> 23: 4 (2009).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-42" id="ch1ft42">42</a>.</span>Gilbert, <i>Anti-Capitalism and Culture</i>, pp. 23&#x2013;4.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-43" id="ch1ft43">43</a>.</span>Daniel Yergin, <i>The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money, and Power</i> (New York: Simon &#x0026; Schuster, 1991); Barry J. Eichengreen, <i>Global Imbalances and the Lessons of Bretton Woods</i> (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-44" id="ch1ft44">44</a>.</span>Geoffrey Barlow, <i>The Labour Movement in Britain from Thatcher to Blair</i> (Frankfurt: Peter Lang, 2008).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-45" id="ch1ft45">45</a>.</span>As an indication of the success of the neoliberal project to crush union power definitively, the proportion of the total working-age population belonging to unions fell in seventeen out of twenty-one OECD nations in the period 1980&#x2013;2000, and fell again in nineteen out of twenty-one in the period 2000&#x2013;07. OECD, &#x2018;Trade Union Density&#x2019;, <i>OECD Stat Extracts</i>, at <a href="http://stats.oecd.org">stats.oecd.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-46" id="ch1ft46">46</a>.</span>David Harvey, <i>A Brief History of Neoliberalism</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007), pp. 11&#x2013;14.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-47" id="ch1ft47">47</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 13.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-48" id="ch1ft48">48</a>.</span>Colin Crouch, <i>Post-Democracy</i> (Cambridge: Polity, 2004), Chapter 1.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-49" id="ch1ft49">49</a>.</span>Tim Jordan, <i>Activism! Direct Action, Hacktivism and the Future of Society</i> (London: Reaktion, 2001), p. 32.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_189"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-50" id="ch1ft50">50</a>.</span>Kimberl&#x00E9; Crenshaw, &#x2018;Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist Politics&#x2019;, <i>University of Chicago Legal Forum</i> 140 (1988).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-51" id="ch1ft51">51</a>.</span>Shulamith Firestone, <i>The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution</i> (New York: Morrow, 1970); Mandy Merck and Stella Sandford, eds, <i>Further Adventures of the Dialectic of Sex: Critical Essays on Shulamith Firestone</i> (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-52" id="ch1ft52">52</a>.</span>See, for example, James A. Geschwender, <i>Class, Race, and Worker Insurgency</i> (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1977).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-53" id="ch1ft53">53</a>.</span>Amory Starr, <i>Naming the Enemy: Anti-Corporate Movements Confront Globalisation</i> (London: Zed, 2000).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-54" id="ch1ft54">54</a>.</span>Jordan, <i>Activism!</i>; Taylor and Gessen, <i>Occupy</i>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="07_Chapter14126GrigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch1ft-55" id="ch1ft55">55</a>.</span>This work builds upon and expands our earlier proposals set out in the &#x2018;Manifesto for an Accelerationist Politics&#x2019;. We largely avoid using the term &#x2018;accelerationism&#x2019; in this work, due to the miasma of competing understandings that has arisen around the concept, rather than from any abdication from its tenets as we understand them. See Alex Williams and Nick Srnicek, &#x2018;#Accelerate: Manifesto for an Accelerationist Politics&#x2019;, in Robin Mackay and Armen Avanessian, eds, <i>#Accelerate: The Accelerationist Reader</i> (Falmouth: Urbanomic, 2014).</p><p class="sub"><b>2. WHY AREN&#x2019;T WE WINNING?<br/>A CRITIQUE OF TODAY&#x2019;S LEFT</b></p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-1" id="ch2ft1">1</a>.</span>These other positions can be seen in the various denunciations of Occupy for being too liberal. See Mark Bray, &#x2018;Five Liberal Tendencies that Plagued Occupy&#x2019;, <i>ROAR Magazine</i>, 14 March 2014, at <a href="http://roarmag.org">roarmag.org</a>. Similar arguments have also been made in the past. Marx, for example, argued that the peasantry provided an insufficient class basis for revolutionary politics, and that only the industrial working class would have interests in line with communism. Our argument is that, regardless of the class basis of horizontalism, localism and other folk politics, they all remain bound by notions of spatial, temporal and conceptual immediacy.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-2" id="ch2ft2">2</a>.</span>Anna Feigenbaum, Fabian Frenzel and Patrick McCurdy, <i>Protest Camps</i> (London: Zed, 2013), p. 159. We might observe that variants of horizontalism were present in left politics for some time before the early 1970s, with proto-horizontalist commitments clearly visible in nineteenth-century anarchism, as well as much earlier movements.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-3" id="ch2ft3">3</a>.</span>This chapter will leave aside the lengthy history of anarchist thought and practice, in order to focus solely on horizontalism as a contemporary embodiment of some of its principles and practices.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-4" id="ch2ft4">4</a>.</span>John Holloway, <i>Change the World Without Taking Power: The Meaning of Revolution Today</i> (London/Sterling, VA: Pluto, 2002).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-5" id="ch2ft5">5</a>.</span>Richard Day, <i>Gramsci Is Dead: Anarchist Currents in the Newest Social Movements</i> (London: Pluto, 2005), p. 8. See also Jon Beasley-Murray, <i>Posthegemony: Political Theory and Latin America</i> (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010).</p><p class="note1"><a id="page_190"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-6" id="ch2ft6">6</a>.</span>A commitment to consensus decision-making is not always an explicit mainstay of horizontalism as such, but is rather a popular contemporary way of procedurally embodying horizontality in practice. Some forms of anarchism, such as South American &#x2018;platformism&#x2019;, explicitly avoid consensus decision-making.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-7" id="ch2ft7">7</a>.</span>Uri Gordon, <i>Anarchy Alive! Anti-Authoritarian Politics from Practice to Theory</i> (London: Pluto, 2007), p. 20.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-8" id="ch2ft8">8</a>.</span>While we remain unconvinced of the large-scale prospects for direct democracy in its face-to-face and/or consensus-driven forms, this certainly does not preclude thinking about how participative democracy might be conceived along more complex, technologically mediated lines.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-9" id="ch2ft9">9</a>.</span>Murray Bookchin, <i>Post-Scarcity Anarchism</i> (Edinburgh: AK Press, 2004), p. xxviii.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-10" id="ch2ft10">10</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 58.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-11" id="ch2ft11">11</a>.</span>Manuel Castells, <i>Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in the Internet Age</i> (Cambridge, UK/Malden, MA: Polity, 2012), p. 11.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-12" id="ch2ft12">12</a>.</span>The origin of the form of consensus decision-making used in contemporary left activism is generally thought to have been with the Quaker religious movement around 300 years ago. The procedure was introduced to political activism via Quaker participants in anti-nuclear campaigns. L. A. Kauffmann, &#x2018;The Theology of Consensus&#x2019;, in Astra Taylor and Keith Gessen, eds, <i>Occupy! Scenes from Occupied America</i> (London: Verso, 2011).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-13" id="ch2ft13">13</a>.</span>Marina Sitrin, &#x2018;Occupy: Making Democracy a Question&#x2019;, in Federico Campagna and Emanuele Campiglio, eds, <i>What We Are Fighting For: A Radical Collective Manifesto</i> (London: Pluto, 2012), pp. 86&#x2013;7.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-14" id="ch2ft14">14</a>.</span>Colin Crouch, <i>Post-Democracy</i> (Cambridge: Polity, 2004).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-15" id="ch2ft15">15</a>.</span>Kauffmann, &#x2018;Theology of Consensus&#x2019;.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-16" id="ch2ft16">16</a>.</span>Federico Campagna and Emanuele Campiglio. &#x2018;What Are We Struggling For?&#x2019;, in Campagna and Campiglio, <i>What Are We Fighting For?</i>, p. 5.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-17" id="ch2ft17">17</a>.</span>Bookchin, <i>Post-Scarcity Anarchism</i>, p. 11.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-18" id="ch2ft18">18</a>.</span>South London Solidarity Federation, &#x2018;Direct Action and Unmediated Struggle&#x2019;, in Campagna and Campiglio, <i>What Are We Fighting For?</i>, p. 192.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-19" id="ch2ft19">19</a>.</span>Perhaps the best-known form of direct action, the mass strike, was the most powerful weapon of labour movements in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and remains a significant tool when used appropriately today. But this often requires scaling up (to a national or industry-wide level) as well as persistence, solidarity, consistent membership and organised systems of funding. The structure of horizontalist movements often militates against the success of this kind of tactic.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-20" id="ch2ft20">20</a>.</span>Feigenbaum et al., <i>Protest Camps</i>, p. 161.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-21" id="ch2ft21">21</a>.</span>The relative successes of Egypt, Tunisia and Iceland in using the tactic of occupation stem from a variety of conditions that render them significantly different from the conditions in Europe and North America &#x2013; for instance, the relatively homogeneous religious and ethno-cultural composition of Tunisia and Iceland; the strong links forged between the occupations and other institutional forms of resistance in all three countries; the different (more visible) form of state repression in Egypt and Tunisia; the small size of Iceland (and the conscious attempt to express the movement in parliamentary terms); and the distinctive affective hurdles (namely, <a id="page_191"/>fear) to be overcome in Egypt and Tunisia. For these and other reasons, these countries managed more success with the tactic.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-22" id="ch2ft22">22</a>.</span>Research and Destroy, &#x2018;The Wreck of the Plaza&#x2019;, <i>Research and Destroy</i>, 14 June 2014, at <a href="http://researchanddestroy.wordpress.com">researchanddestroy.wordpress.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-23" id="ch2ft23">23</a>.</span>Josh MacPhee, &#x2018;A Qualitative Quilt Born of Pizzatopia&#x2019;, in Kate Khatib, Margaret Killjoy and Mike McGuire, eds, <i>We Are Many: Reflections on Movement Strategy from Occupation to Liberation</i> (Edinburgh: AK Press, 2012), p. 27.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-24" id="ch2ft24">24</a>.</span>Taylor and Gessen, <i>Occupy!</i>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-25" id="ch2ft25">25</a>.</span>George Ciccariello-Maher, &#x2018;From Oscar Grant to Occupy: The Long Arc of Rebellion in Oakland,&#x2019; in Khatib et al., <i>We Are Many</i>, p. 42.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-26" id="ch2ft26">26</a>.</span>Castells, <i>Networks of Outrage and Hope</i>, p. 59.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-27" id="ch2ft27">27</a>.</span>Feigenbaum et al., <i>Protest Camps</i>, p. 35.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-28" id="ch2ft28">28</a>.</span>Ibid., pp. 52&#x2013;3.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-29" id="ch2ft29">29</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 42.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-30" id="ch2ft30">30</a>.</span>See, for example, the Australian Tent Embassy built around aboriginal land rights (ibid., p. 45); Castells, <i>Networks of Outrage and Hope</i>, pp. 59&#x2013;60.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-31" id="ch2ft31">31</a>.</span>Lester Spence and Mike McGuire, &#x2018;Occupy and the 99%&#x2019;, in Khatib et al., <i>We Are Many</i>, p. 58.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-32" id="ch2ft32">32</a>.</span>Ra&#x00FA;l Zibechi, &#x2018;Latin America Today, Seen from Below&#x2019;, <i>Upside Down World</i>, 26 June 2014, at <a href="http://upsidedownworld.org">upsidedownworld.org</a>, pp. 42&#x2013;4. We would argue that, while spontaneous political and social movements lasting a relatively short time have a role to play, a politics that consists <i>entirely</i> of such entities will find it extremely difficult to take apart and replace the relatively long-lasting embedded phenomena that characterise advanced capitalism.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-33" id="ch2ft33">33</a>.</span>Anton Pannekoek, <i>Workers&#x2019; Councils</i> (Edinburgh: AK Press, 2003); Gregory Fossedal, <i>Direct Democracy in Switzerland</i> (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 2007); Keir Milburn, &#x2018;Beyond Assemblyism: The Processual Calling of the 21st-Century Left&#x2019;, in Shannon Brincat, ed., <i>Communism in the 21st Century, Volume 3: The Future of Communism</i> (Santa Barbara: Praeger, 2013).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-34" id="ch2ft34">34</a>.</span>Isabel Ortiz, Sara Burke, Mohamed Berrada and Hern&#x00E1;n Cort&#x00E9;s, <i>World Protests 2006&#x2013;2013</i> (New York: Initiative for Policy Dialogue and Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung, 2013), pdf available at <a href="http://fes-globalization.org">fes-globalization.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-35" id="ch2ft35">35</a>.</span>Michael Albert, <i>Parecon: Life After Capitalism</i> (London: Verso, 2004).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-36" id="ch2ft36">36</a>.</span>Samuel Farber, &#x2018;Reflections on &#x201C;Prefigurative Politics&#x201D;&#x2019;, <i>International Socialist Review</i> 92 (March 2011), at <a href="http://isreview.org">isreview.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-37" id="ch2ft37">37</a>.</span>Jane McAlevey, <i>Raising Expectations (and Raising Hell): My Decade Fighting for the Labor Movement</i> (London: Verso, 2014), p. 11.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-38" id="ch2ft38">38</a>.</span>Not An Alternative, &#x2018;Counter Power as Common Power&#x2019;, <i>Journal of Aesthetics and Protest</i> 9 (2014), at <a href="http://joaap.org">joaap.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-39" id="ch2ft39">39</a>.</span>Martin Gilens and Benjamin Page, &#x2018;Testing Theories of American Politics: Elites, Interest Groups, and Average Citizens&#x2019;, <i>Perspectives on Politics</i> 12: 3 (2014).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-40" id="ch2ft40">40</a>.</span>Rodrigo Nunes, <i>Organisation of the Organisationless: Collective Action After Networks</i> (London: Mute, 2014), p. 36.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-41" id="ch2ft41">41</a>.</span>David Graeber, <i>Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology</i> (Chicago, IL: Prickly Paradigm, 2004), p. 89.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_192"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-42" id="ch2ft42">42</a>.</span>Helen Hester, &#x2018;Synthetic Genders and the Limits of Micropolitics&#x2019;, <i>&#x2026; ment</i> 6 (2015).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-43" id="ch2ft43">43</a>.</span>Marco Desiriis and Jodi Dean, &#x2018;A Movement Without Demands?&#x2019; <i>Possible Futures</i>, 3 January 2012, at <a href="http://possible-futures.org">possible-futures.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-44" id="ch2ft44">44</a>.</span>Noam Chomsky, <i>Occupy</i> (London: Penguin, 2012), p. 58.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-45" id="ch2ft45">45</a>.</span>Not An Alternative, &#x2018;Counter Power as Common Power&#x2019;.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-46" id="ch2ft46">46</a>.</span>Ibid.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-47" id="ch2ft47">47</a>.</span>Jeroen Gunning and Ilan Zvi Baron, <i>Why Occupy a Square? People, Protests and Movements in the Egyptian Revolution</i> (London: Hurst, 2013), pp. 180&#x2013;1.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-48" id="ch2ft48">48</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 181.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-49" id="ch2ft49">49</a>.</span>Hakim Bey, <i>TAZ: The Temporary Autonomous Zone, Ontological Anarchy, Poetic Terrorism</i>, 2nd rev. edn (Brooklyn: Autonomedia, 2011), p. xi.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-50" id="ch2ft50">50</a>.</span>&#x2018;Communiqu&#x00E9; from an Absent Future&#x2019;, <i>We Want Everything</i>, 24 September 2009, at <a href="http://wewanteverything.wordpress.com">wewanteverything.wordpress.com</a>, p. 19.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-51" id="ch2ft51">51</a>.</span>Desiriis and Dean, &#x2018;A Movement Without Demands?&#x2019;.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-52" id="ch2ft52">52</a>.</span>See, for example, Theodore Schatzki&#x2019;s discussions of Shaker villages: Theodore Schatzki, <i>The Site of the Social: A Philosophical Account of the Constitution of Social Life and Change</i> (University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University, 2002).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-53" id="ch2ft53">53</a>.</span>Farber, &#x2018;Reflections on &#x201C;Prefigurative Politics&#x201D;&#x2019;.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-54" id="ch2ft54">54</a>.</span>Bruno Bosteels, &#x2018;The Mexican Commune&#x2019;, at <a href="http://academia.edu">academia.edu</a>, p. 12.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-55" id="ch2ft55">55</a>.</span>This is an old question, often invoked in debates between anarchism and Marxism. See, for example, historical reflections on anarchism and communism in Mexico in ibid., p. 6.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-56" id="ch2ft56">56</a>.</span>The Invisible Committee, <i>The Coming Insurrection</i> (Los Angeles: Semiotext(e), 2009), p. 12; John Holloway, <i>Crack Capitalism</i> (London: Pluto, 2010); Nathan Brown, &#x2018;Rational Kernel, Real Movement: Badiou and Theorie Communiste in the Age of Riots&#x2019;, <i>Lana Turner: A Journal of Poetry and Opinion</i> 5 (2012); David Graeber, &#x2018;Afterword&#x2019;, in Khatib et al., <i>We Are Many</i>, p. 425.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-57" id="ch2ft57">57</a>.</span>Spence and McGuire, &#x2018;Occupy and the 99%&#x2019;, p. 61.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-58" id="ch2ft58">58</a>.</span>Paul Mason, <i>Why It&#x2019;s Kicking Off Everywhere: The New Global Revolutions</i> (London: Verso, 2012), p. 63.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-59" id="ch2ft59">59</a>.</span>In light of the emergence of Occupy, McKenzie Wark memorably asked: How do you occupy an abstraction? See McKenzie Wark, &#x2018;How to Occupy an Abstraction&#x2019;, at <a href="http://versobooks.com">versobooks.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-60" id="ch2ft60">60</a>.</span>R. I. M. Dunbar, &#x2018;Neocortex Size as a Constraint on Group Size in Primates&#x2019;, <i>Journal of Human Evolution</i> 22: 6 (1992).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-61" id="ch2ft61">61</a>.</span>For the most extensive study of this, see Marina Sitrin, <i>Everyday Revolutions: Horizontalism and Autonomy in Argentina</i> (London: Zed, 2012).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-62" id="ch2ft62">62</a>.</span>Silvia Federici, &#x2018;Feminism, Finance and the Future of #Occupy &#x2013; An Interview&#x2019;, <i>ZNet</i>, 26 November 2011, at <a href="http://zcomm.org">zcomm.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-63" id="ch2ft63">63</a>.</span>A similar problem arose with the general assemblies at Occupy Wall Street. Milburn, &#x2018;Beyond Assemblyism, p. 191; Sitrin, <i>Everyday Revolutions</i>, p. 67&#x2013;8.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-64" id="ch2ft64">64</a>.</span>Sitrin, <i>Everyday Revolutions</i>, p. 130; Juan Alcorta, &#x2018;Solidarity Economies in Argentina and Japan&#x2019;, <i>Studies of Modern Society</i> 40: 12 (2007), p. 270.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-65" id="ch2ft65">65</a>.</span>Farber, &#x2018;Reflections on &#x201C;Prefigurative Politics&#x201D;&#x2019;.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_193"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-66" id="ch2ft66">66</a>.</span>Estimates are that the barter economy went from between 1 and 2.5 million people to just 100,000 people once the economy recovered. Alcorta, &#x2018;Solidarity Economies&#x2019;, pp. 272&#x2013;3; Sitrin, <i>Everyday Revolutions</i>, p. 77.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-67" id="ch2ft67">67</a>.</span>Feigenbaum et al., <i>Protest Camps</i>, p. 159.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-68" id="ch2ft68">68</a>.</span>Holloway, <i>Change the World Without Taking Power</i>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-69" id="ch2ft69">69</a>.</span>Ernst Schumacher, <i>Small Is Beautiful: Economics as if People Mattered</i> (New York: Harper &#x0026; Row, 1973).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-70" id="ch2ft70">70</a>.</span>Phillip Blond, <i>Red Tory: How Left and Right Have Broken Britain and How We Can Fix It</i> (London: Faber &#x0026; Faber, 2010).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-71" id="ch2ft71">71</a>.</span>Justin Healey, <i>Ethical Consumerism</i> (Thirroul, NSW: Spinney, 2013).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-72" id="ch2ft72">72</a>.</span>Uri Gordon, <i>Anarchy Alive! Anti-Authoritarian Politics from Practice to Theory</i> (London: Pluto, 2007).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-73" id="ch2ft73">73</a>.</span>Alan Ducasse, &#x2018;The Slow Revolutionary&#x2019;, <i>Time</i>, 3 October 2004.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-74" id="ch2ft74">74</a>.</span>Carl Honor&#x00E9;, <i>In Praise of Slow: Challenging the Cult of Speed</i> (New York: HarperSanFrancisco, 2005).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-75" id="ch2ft75">75</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 84.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-76" id="ch2ft76">76</a>.</span>Sarah Bowen, Sinikka Elliott and Joslyn Brenton, &#x2018;The Joy of Cooking?&#x2019; <i>Contexts</i> 13: 3 (2014).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-77" id="ch2ft77">77</a>.</span>Miriam Glucksmann and Jane Nolan, &#x2018;New Technologies and the Transformations of Women&#x2019;s Labour at Home and Work&#x2019;, <i>Equal Opportunities International</i> 26: 2 (20 February 2007).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-78" id="ch2ft78">78</a>.</span>Will Boisvert, &#x2018;An Environmentalist on the Lie of Locavorism&#x2019;, <i>New York Observer</i>, 16 April 2013.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-79" id="ch2ft79">79</a>.</span>Alison Smith, Paul Watkiss, Geoff Tweddle, Alan McKinnon, Mike Browne, Alistair Hunt, Colin Treleven, Chris Nash and Sam Cross, <i>The Validity of Food Miles as an Indicator of Sustainable Development: Final Report</i> (London: Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2005).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-80" id="ch2ft80">80</a>.</span>Caroline Saunders, Andrew Barber and Greg Taylor, <i>Food Miles: Comparative Energy/Emissions Performance of New Zealand&#x2019;s Agriculture Industry</i>, Agribusiness and Economics Research Unit, Lincoln University, Canterbury, NZ, July 2006, pdf available at <a href="http://lincoln.ac.nz">lincoln.ac.nz</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-81" id="ch2ft81">81</a>.</span>In the UK in 2005, air freight made up just 1 per cent of food tonne miles travelled, but 11 per cent of food-related emissions. Smith et al., <i>Validity of Food Miles</i>, p. 3.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-82" id="ch2ft82">82</a>.</span>Doug Henwood, &#x2018;Moving Money (Revisited)&#x2019;, <i>LBO News</i>, 2010, at <a href="http://lbo-news.com">lbo-news.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-83" id="ch2ft83">83</a>.</span>Stephen Gandel, &#x2018;By Every Measure, the Big Banks Are Bigger&#x2019;, <i>Fortune</i>, 13 September 2013, at <a href="http://fortune.com">fortune.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-84" id="ch2ft84">84</a>.</span>Victoria McGrane and Tan Gillian, &#x2018;Lenders Are Warned on Risk&#x2019;, <i>Wall Street Journal</i>, 25 June 2014.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-85" id="ch2ft85">85</a>.</span><i>OTC Derivatives Statistics at End-June 2014</i>, Basel: Bank for International Settlements, 2014, p. 2, at <a href="http://bis.org">bis.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-86" id="ch2ft86">86</a>.</span>David Boyle, <i>A Local Banking System: The Urgent Need to Reinvigorate UK High Street Banking</i> (London: New Economics Foundation, 2011), p. 8.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-87" id="ch2ft87">87</a>.</span>Ibid., pp. 8&#x2013;9.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-88" id="ch2ft88">88</a>.</span>Giles Tremlett, &#x2018;Spain&#x2019;s Savings Banks&#x2019; Culture of Greed, Cronyism, and Political Meddling&#x2019;, <i>Guardian</i>, 8 June 2012.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_194"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-89" id="ch2ft89">89</a>.</span>Boyle, <i>Local Banking System</i>, p. 10.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-90" id="ch2ft90">90</a>.</span>Andrew Bibby, &#x2018;Co-op Bank Crisis: What Next for the Co-operative Sector?&#x2019;, <i>Guardian</i>, 21 January 2014.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-91" id="ch2ft91">91</a>.</span>Greg Sharzer, <i>No Local: Why Small-Scale Alternatives Won&#x2019;t Change the World</i> (Winchester: Zero Books, 2012), p. 3.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-92" id="ch2ft92">92</a>.</span>Philip Mirowski, <i>Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste: How Neoliberalism Survived the Financial Meltdown</i> (London: Verso, 2013), p. 326.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-93" id="ch2ft93">93</a>.</span>Zibechi, &#x2018;Latin America Today&#x2019;.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-94" id="ch2ft94">94</a>.</span>Christian Marazzi, &#x2018;Exodus Without Promised Land&#x2019;, in Campagna and Campiglio, eds, <i>What We Are Fighting For</i>, p. viii.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-95" id="ch2ft95">95</a>.</span>Such an approach has also been labelled &#x2018;alternativism&#x2019; by communisation theorists. Endnotes, &#x2018;What Are We to Do?&#x2019; in Benjamin Noys, ed., <i>Communization and Its Discontents: Contestation, Critique, and Contemporary Struggles</i> (Brooklyn: Minor Compositions, 2012), p. 30.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-96" id="ch2ft96">96</a>.</span>Day, <i>Gramsci Is Dead</i>, pp. 20&#x2013;1.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-97" id="ch2ft97">97</a>.</span>Bey, <i>TAZ</i>, p. 99.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-98" id="ch2ft98">98</a>.</span>Invisible Committee, <i>Coming Insurrection</i>, p. 96.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-99" id="ch2ft99">99</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 113.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-100" id="ch2ft100">100</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 102.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-101" id="ch2ft101">101</a>.</span>Ibid., pp. 107, 114.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-102" id="ch2ft102">102</a>.</span>Vivek Chibber, <i>Postcolonial Theory and the Specter of Capital</i> (London: Verso, 2013), pp. 228&#x2013;9.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-103" id="ch2ft103">103</a>.</span>Dan Hancox, <i>The Village Against the World</i> (London: Verso, 2013), Chapter 8; Ulrike Fokken, &#x2018;Die Rote Insel&#x2019;, <i>Die Tageszeitung</i>, 16 February 2013, at <a href="http://taz.de">taz.de</a>; Jason E. Smith, &#x2018;The Day After the Insurrection&#x2019;, <i>Radical Philosophy</i> 189 (2015), p. 43.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-104" id="ch2ft104">104</a>.</span>See also Alberto Toscano, &#x2018;The Prejudice Against Prometheus&#x2019;, <i>STIR</i>, 2011, at <a href="http://stirtoaction.com">stirtoaction.com</a>.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="08_Chapter2GrigorMalogrigormalog4521mailcom.xhtml#ch2ft-105" id="ch2ft105">105</a>.</span>Chris Dixon, &#x2018;Organizing to Win the World&#x2019;, <i>Briarpatch Magazine</i>, 18 March 2015, at <a href="http://briarpatchmagazine.com">briarpatchmagazine.com</a>; Keir Milburn, &#x2018;On Social Strikes and Directional Demands&#x2019;, <i>Plan C</i>, 7 May 2015, at <a href="http://weareplanc.org">weareplanc.org</a>.</p><p class="sub"><b>3. WHY ARE THEY WINNING?<br/>THE MAKING OF NEOLIBERAL HEGEMONY</b></p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-1" id="ch3ft1">1</a>.</span>Jamie Peck, <i>Constructions of Neoliberal Reason</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), p. 40.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-2" id="ch3ft2">2</a>.</span>This standard history is now in the process of being rewritten, and this chapter relies heavily on the pioneers of this research, including the unpublished work of Alex Andrews. See, for example, Philip Mirowski and Dieter Plehwe, eds, <i>The Road from Mont Pelerin: The Making of the Neoliberal Thought Collective</i> (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009); Philip Mirowski, <i>Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste: How Neoliberalism Survived the Financial Meltdown</i> (London: Verso, 2013); Peck, <i>Constructions of Neoliberal Reason</i>; Daniel Stedman Jones, <i>Masters of the Universe: Hayek, Friedman, and the Birth of Neoliberal Politics</i> (Princeton, NJ: <a id="page_195"/>Princeton University Press, 2012); Richard Cockett, <i>Thinking the Unthinkable: Think-Tanks and the Economic Counter-Revolution, 1931&#x2013;1983</i> (London: Fontana, 1995); Michel Foucault, <i>The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the College de France 1978&#x2013;1979</i> (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-3" id="ch3ft3">3</a>.</span>Witness, for instance, the unlikely but immensely productive alliance in the United States between economic neoliberals and radical social conservatives. Peck, <i>Constructions of Neoliberal Reason</i>, p. 6; David Harvey, <i>A Brief History of Neoliberalism</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), pp. 49&#x2013;50.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-4" id="ch3ft4">4</a>.</span>Pierre Dardot and Christian Laval, <i>The New Way of the World: On Neoliberal Society</i>, transl. Gregory Elliot (London: Verso, 2014).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-5" id="ch3ft5">5</a>.</span>Rob Van Horn, &#x2018;Reinventing Monopoly and the Role of Corporations: The Roots of Chicago Law and Economics&#x2019;, in Mirowski and Plehwe, <i>Road from Mont Pelerin</i>, pp. 204&#x2013;37.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-6" id="ch3ft6">6</a>.</span>Harvey, <i>Brief History of Neoliberalism</i>.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-7" id="ch3ft7">7</a>.</span>Philip Cerny, <i>Rethinking World Politics: A Theory of Transnational Neopluralism</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 2010), p. 128.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-8" id="ch3ft8">8</a>.</span>Karl Polanyi is a notable exception, having long ago recognised the role of the state in building markets in labour and land. Karl Polanyi, <i>The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of Our Time</i> (Boston: Beacon Press, 2001); Peck, <i>Constructions of Neoliberalism Reason</i>, p. 4.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-9" id="ch3ft9">9</a>.</span>This gendering of rights is appropriate for the historical context.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-10" id="ch3ft10">10</a>.</span>It is worth mentioning that this political construction of economies negates the possibility of any simple economism. Thomas Lemke, &#x2018;The Birth of Biopolitics: Michel Foucault&#x2019;s Lecture at the Coll&#x00E8;ge de France on Neoliberal Governmentality&#x2019;, <i>Economy and Society</i> 30: 2 (2001), p. 194.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-11" id="ch3ft11">11</a>.</span>Harvey, <i>Brief History of Neoliberalism</i>, p. 2.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-12" id="ch3ft12">12</a>.</span>The construction of markets has been exceptionally well studied within the sociology of finance and economic sociology. See Donald MacKenzie, <i>Material Markets: How Economic Agents Are Constructed</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), Chapter 7; Donald MacKenzie, Fabian Muniesa and Lucia Siu, eds, <i>Do Economists Make Markets? On the Performativity of Economics</i> (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007); Michel Callon, &#x2018;An Essay on Framing and Overflowing: Economic Externalities Revisited by Sociology&#x2019;, in Michel Callon, ed., <i>The Laws of Markets</i> (Oxford: Blackwell, 1998), pp. 244&#x2013;69; Michel Callon, &#x2018;The Embeddedness of Economic Markets in Economics&#x2019;, in Callon, <i>Laws of Markets</i>; Andrew Barry, <i>Political Machines: Governing a Technological Society</i> (London: Athlone, 2001).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-13" id="ch3ft13">13</a>.</span>Nick Srnicek, &#x2018;Representing Complexity: The Material Construction of World Politics&#x2019;, PhD thesis, London School of Economics and Political Science, 2013, Chapter 5; Donald MacKenzie, <i>An Engine, Not a Camera: How Financial Models Shape Markets</i> (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2008).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-14" id="ch3ft14">14</a>.</span>Callon, &#x2018;Essay on Framing and Overflowing&#x2019;.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-15" id="ch3ft15">15</a>.</span>This create-and-sustain movement in many ways parallels Jamie Peck&#x2019;s notion of the roll-back and roll-out phases of neoliberalisation. See Peck, <i>Constructions of Neoliberal Reason</i>, pp. 22&#x2013;3.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_196"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-16" id="ch3ft16">16</a>.</span>Mirowski and Plehwe, <i>Road from Mont Pelerin</i>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-17" id="ch3ft17">17</a>.</span>Peck, <i>Constructions of Neoliberal Reason</i>, p. 48.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-18" id="ch3ft18">18</a>.</span>Plehwe, &#x2018;Introduction&#x2019;, in Mirowski and Plehwe, <i>Road from Mont Pelerin</i>, p. 16.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-19" id="ch3ft19">19</a>.</span>Cockett, <i>Thinking the Unthinkable</i>, p. 109.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-20" id="ch3ft20">20</a>.</span>Peck, <i>Constructions of Neoliberal Reason</i>, p. 50; Cockett, <i>Thinking the Unthinkable</i>, p. 4.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-21" id="ch3ft21">21</a>.</span>Peck, <i>Constructions of Neoliberal Reason</i>, p. 50.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-22" id="ch3ft22">22</a>.</span>Cited in Cockett, <i>Thinking the Unthinkable</i>, p. 104.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-23" id="ch3ft23">23</a>.</span>Peck, <i>Constructions of Neoliberal Reason</i>, p. 49.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-24" id="ch3ft24">24</a>.</span>Cited in Cockett, <i>Thinking the Unthinkable</i>, p. 111.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-25" id="ch3ft25">25</a>.</span>Plehwe, &#x2018;Introduction&#x2019;, p. 7.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-26" id="ch3ft26">26</a>.</span>Dardot and Laval, <i>New Way of the World</i>, p. 55.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-27" id="ch3ft27">27</a>.</span>Plehwe, &#x2018;Introduction&#x2019;, p. 4.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-28" id="ch3ft28">28</a>.</span>Peck, <i>Constructions of Neoliberal Reason</i>, p. 276.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-29" id="ch3ft29">29</a>.</span>Colin Crouch, <i>The Strange Non-Death of Neoliberalism</i> (Cambridge: Polity, 2011), p. 23.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-30" id="ch3ft30">30</a>.</span>Cockett, <i>Thinking the Unthinkable</i>, p. 117.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-31" id="ch3ft31">31</a>.</span>Peck, <i>Constructions of Neoliberal Reason</i>, p. 51.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-32" id="ch3ft32">32</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 84.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-33" id="ch3ft33">33</a>.</span>Peck, <i>Constructions of Neoliberal Reason</i>, p. 57.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-34" id="ch3ft34">34</a>.</span>Quantitative social network analysis highlights the significance of Fisher as well, placing him alongside Hayek at the centre of the MPS network. See Plehwe, &#x2018;Introduction&#x2019;, p. 20.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-35" id="ch3ft35">35</a>.</span>Cockett, <i>Thinking the Unthinkable</i>, p. 131.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-36" id="ch3ft36">36</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 132.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-37" id="ch3ft37">37</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 141.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-38" id="ch3ft38">38</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 142.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-39" id="ch3ft39">39</a>.</span>Ibid., pp. 156&#x2013;7.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-40" id="ch3ft40">40</a>.</span>Ibid., Chapter 5.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-41" id="ch3ft41">41</a>.</span>Harvey, <i>Brief History of Neoliberalism</i>, p. 44.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-42" id="ch3ft42">42</a>.</span>Ibid.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-43" id="ch3ft43">43</a>.</span>Cockett, <i>Thinking the Unthinkable</i>, p. 184.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-44" id="ch3ft44">44</a>.</span>Leo Panitch and Sam Gindin, <i>The Making of Global Capitalism: The Political Economy of American Empire</i> (London: Verso, 2012), p. 114.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-45" id="ch3ft45">45</a>.</span>Harvey, <i>Brief History of Neoliberalism</i>, p. 54.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-46" id="ch3ft46">46</a>.</span>Plehwe, &#x2018;Introduction&#x2019;, p. 6.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-47" id="ch3ft47">47</a>.</span>Harvey, <i>Brief History of Neoliberalism</i>, p. 13.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-48" id="ch3ft48">48</a>.</span>Ann Pettifor, &#x2018;The Power to &#x201C;Create Money out of Thin Air&#x201D;&#x2019;, openDemocracy, 18 January 2013, at <a href="http://opendemocracy.net">opendemocracy.net</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-49" id="ch3ft49">49</a>.</span>This desire for an answer can also be seen in the choice of macroeconomic models. Peter Kenway, <i>From Keynesianism to Monetarism: The Evolution of UK Macroeconometric Models</i> (London: Routledge, 1994), p. 39.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-50" id="ch3ft50">50</a>.</span>Cockett, <i>Thinking the Unthinkable</i>, p. 196.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-51" id="ch3ft51">51</a>.</span>Milton Friedman, <i>Capitalism and Freedom: Fortieth Anniversary Edition</i> (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002), p. xiv.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_197"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-52" id="ch3ft52">52</a>.</span>Some argue that neoliberalism was necessary because of the crisis of accumulation facing capitalism in the 1970s. But this argument neglects alternative ways in which that crisis could have been resolved and attributes immense clarity of self-interest to capitalists.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-53" id="ch3ft53">53</a>.</span>Philip Cerny, <i>Rethinking World Politics: A Theory of Transnational Neopluralism</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 2010), p. 139.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-54" id="ch3ft54">54</a>.</span>David Stuckler, Lawrence King and Martin McKee, &#x2018;Mass Privatisation and the Post-Communist Mortality Crisis: A Cross-National Analysis&#x2019;, <i>Lancet</i> 373: 9,661 (2009).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-55" id="ch3ft55">55</a>.</span>Harvey, <i>Brief History of Neoliberalism</i>, p. 41.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-56" id="ch3ft56">56</a>.</span>This is one source of the common claim that postmodernism is the cultural expression of neoliberalism.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-57" id="ch3ft57">57</a>.</span>Harvey, <i>Brief History of Neoliberalism</i>, p. 53.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-58" id="ch3ft58">58</a>.</span>Dardot and Laval, <i>New Way of the World</i>, p. 3.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-59" id="ch3ft59">59</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 265.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-60" id="ch3ft60">60</a>.</span>Mark Fisher, <i>Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative?</i> (Winchester: Zero, 2009), Chapter 4.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-61" id="ch3ft61">61</a>.</span>Wanda Vrasti, &#x2018;Struggling with Precarity: From More and Better Jobs to Less and Lesser Work&#x2019;, <i>Disorder of Things</i>, 12 October 2013, at <a href="http://thedisorderofthings.com">thedisorderofthings.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-62" id="ch3ft62">62</a>.</span>Harvey, <i>Brief History of Neoliberalism</i>, p. 61.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-63" id="ch3ft63">63</a>.</span>For evidence of the austerity narrative and its adoption in popular consciousness, see Liam Stanley, &#x2018;&#x201C;We&#x2019;re Reaping What We Sowed&#x201D;: Everyday Crisis Narratives and Acquiescence to the Age of Austerity&#x2019;, <i>New Political Economy</i> 19: 6 (2014).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-64" id="ch3ft64">64</a>.</span>Ernesto Laclau, &#x2018;Identity and Hegemony: The Role of Universality in the Constitution of Political Logics&#x2019;, in Judith Butler, Ernesto Laclau and Slavoj &#x017D;i&#x017E;ek, eds, <i>Contingency, Hegemony and Universality: Contemporary Dialogues on the Left</i> (London: Verso, 2011), p. 50.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-65" id="ch3ft65">65</a>.</span>The classical mark of ideology today is that it feeds on cynicism, or, as Slavoj &#x017D;i&#x017E;ek puts it, ideology works even (and especially) if you <i>do not believe in it</i>. See Slavoj &#x017D;i&#x017E;ek, <i>The Sublime Object of Ideology</i> (London/New York: Verso, 1989).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-66" id="ch3ft66">66</a>.</span>Mirowski, <i>Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste</i>, p. 356.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="09_Chapter3Grigor7329Malogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch3ft-67" id="ch3ft67">67</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 332.</p><p class="sub"><b>4. LEFT MODERNITY</b></p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-1" id="ch4ft1">1</a>.</span>This expansionary process has been conceived of in a variety of (not incompatible) ways &#x2013; for instance, through uneven and combined development, spatial fixes, and expanding cycles of hegemony. In each case, though, the expansionary nature of capitalist universalism is readily apparent. See, respectively, Neil Smith, <i>Uneven Development: Nature, Capital and the Production of Space</i> (London: Verso, 2010); David Harvey, <i>The Limits to Capital</i> (London: Verso, 2006); Giovanni Arrighi, <i>The Long Twentieth Century: Money, Power and the Origins of Our Time</i> (London: Verso, 2009).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-2" id="ch4ft2">2</a>.</span>For a lengthy defence of this claim, see Vivek Chibber, <i>Postcolonial Theory and the Specter of Capital</i> (London: Verso, 2013), &#x00B6; 9.4.</p><p class="note1"><a id="page_198"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-3" id="ch4ft3">3</a>.</span>&#x2018;For it is finally the universal &#x2026; which furnishes the only true denial of established universalisms.&#x2019; Fran&#x00E7;ois Jullien, <i>On the Universal: The Uniform, the Common and Dialogue Between Cultures</i> (Cambridge: Polity, 2014), p. 90.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-4" id="ch4ft4">4</a>.</span>Mark Fisher and Jeremy Gilbert, <i>Reclaim Modernity: Beyond Markets, Beyond Machines</i> (London: Compass, 2014), pp. 12&#x2013;14.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-5" id="ch4ft5">5</a>.</span>Sandro Mezzadra, &#x2018;How Many Histories of Labor? Towards a Theory of Postcolonial Capitalism&#x2019;, <i>European Institute for Progressive Cultural Policies</i>, 2012, at <a href="http://eipcp.net">eipcp.net</a>.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-6" id="ch4ft6">6</a>.</span>Mark Fisher, <i>Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative?</i> (Winchester: Zero, 2009).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-7" id="ch4ft7">7</a>.</span>Similar arguments have also been made about postmodernity. See Harvey, <i>The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Origins of Cultural Change</i> (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 1991).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-8" id="ch4ft8">8</a>.</span>Peter Wagner, <i>Modernity: Understanding the Present</i> (Cambridge: Polity, 2012), p. 23.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-9" id="ch4ft9">9</a>.</span>For a similar argument with respect to &#x2018;development&#x2019;, see Kalyan Sanyal, <i>Rethinking Capitalist Development: Primitive Accumulation, Governmentality and Post-Colonial Capitalism</i> (New Delhi: Routledge India, 2013), p. 92.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-10" id="ch4ft10">10</a>.</span>To give a sense of this variety, Jameson outlines fourteen different proposals for the beginning of modernity as historical period. Fredric Jameson, <i>A Singular Modernity: Essay on the Ontology of the Present</i> (London: Verso, 2002), p. 32.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-11" id="ch4ft11">11</a>.</span>Alberto Toscano, <i>Fanaticism: On the Uses of an Idea</i> (London: Verso, 2010); Frederick Cooper, <i>Decolonization and African Society: The Labor Question in French and British Africa</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-12" id="ch4ft12">12</a>.</span>Chibber, <i>Postcolonial Theory</i>, p. 233.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-13" id="ch4ft13">13</a>.</span>We seek to follow Susan Buck-Morss when she writes: &#x2018;The rejection of Western-centrism does not place a taboo on using the tools of Western thought. On the contrary, it frees the critical tools of the Enlightenment &#x2026; for original and creative application.&#x2019; Susan Buck-Morss, <i>Thinking Past Terror: Islamism and Critical Theory on the Left</i> (London: Verso, 2003), p. 99.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-14" id="ch4ft14">14</a>.</span>Wang Hui, <i>The End of the Revolution: China and the Limits of Modernity</i> (London: Verso, 2011), pp. 69&#x2013;70.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-15" id="ch4ft15">15</a>.</span>G&#x00F6;ran Therborn, <i>European Modernity and Beyond: The Trajectory of European Societies, 1945&#x2013;2000</i> (London: Sage, 1995), p. 4.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-16" id="ch4ft16">16</a>.</span>Jameson, <i>Singular Modernity</i>, p. 18.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-17" id="ch4ft17">17</a>.</span>Corey Robin, <i>The Reactionary Mind: Conservatism from Edmund Burke to Sarah Palin</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-18" id="ch4ft18">18</a>.</span>Simon Critchley, &#x2018;Ideas for Modern Living: The Future&#x2019;, <i>Guardian</i>, 21 November 2010.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-19" id="ch4ft19">19</a>.</span>Kamran Matin, &#x2018;Redeeming the Universal: Postcolonialism and the Inner Life of Eurocentrism&#x2019;, <i>European Journal of International Relations</i> 19: 2 (2013), p. 354.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-20" id="ch4ft20">20</a>.</span>Walt Whitman Rostow, <i>The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist Manifesto</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-21" id="ch4ft21">21</a>.</span>Walter Mignolo, <i>The Darker Side of Western Modernity: Global Futures, Decolonial Options</i> (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011), pp. xxiv&#x2013;xxv.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-22" id="ch4ft22">22</a>.</span>S. N. Eisenstadt, &#x2018;Multiple Modernities&#x2019;, <i>Daedalus</i> 129: 1 (2000), p. 1.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-23" id="ch4ft23">23</a>.</span>Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer, <i>Dialectic of Enlightenment</i> (London: Verso, 1997); Zygmunt Bauman, <i>Modernity and the Holocaust</i> (Cambridge: Polity, 1991).</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_199"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-24" id="ch4ft24">24</a>.</span>David Priestland, <i>The Red Flag: A History of Communism</i> (New York: Grove, 2009).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-25" id="ch4ft25">25</a>.</span>Stephen Eric Bronner, <i>Reclaiming the Enlightenment: Toward a Politics of Radical Engagement</i> (New York: Columbia University Press, 2004), p. 28.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-26" id="ch4ft26">26</a>.</span>Lyotard, <i>The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge</i>, transl. Geoffrey Bennington and Brian Massumi (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1984).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-27" id="ch4ft27">27</a>.</span>Walter Mignolo and He Weihua, &#x2018;The Prospect of Harmony and the Decolonial View of the World&#x2019;, <i>Marxism and Reality</i> 4 (2012).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-28" id="ch4ft28">28</a>.</span>Wagner, <i>Modernity</i>, p. 81.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-29" id="ch4ft29">29</a>.</span>S. N. Eisenstadt, &#x2018;Multiple Modernities&#x2019;, <i>Daedalus</i> 129: 1 (2000).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-30" id="ch4ft30">30</a>.</span>For contemporary reflections on this concept, see the debates collected in Alex Anievas, ed., <i>Marxism and World Politics: Contesting Global Capitalism</i> (London: Routledge, 2012).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-31" id="ch4ft31">31</a>.</span>For a philosophical&#x2013;political&#x2013;religious genealogy of the universal, see Jullien, <i>On the Universal</i>, Chapters 4&#x2013;7.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-32" id="ch4ft32">32</a>.</span>It should be clear that the discussion of the universal here is within a political rather than a philosophical register.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-33" id="ch4ft33">33</a>.</span>&#x00C9;tienne Balibar, &#x2018;Sub Specie Universitatis&#x2019;, <i>Topoi</i> 25: 1&#x2013;2 (2006), p. 11.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-34" id="ch4ft34">34</a>.</span>Broadly, we can divide these criticisms between Latin American decolonialism, South Asian subaltern studies and African postcolonialism, which each inflect modernity and colonialism through their regional history.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-35" id="ch4ft35">35</a>.</span>Mignolo, <i>Darker Side of Western Modernity</i>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-36" id="ch4ft36">36</a>.</span>Ibid., Chapter 2; Ram&#x00F3;n Grosfoguel, &#x2018;Decolonizing Western Uni-Versalisms: Decolonial Pluri-Versalism from Aim&#x00E9; C&#x00E9;saire to the Zapatistas&#x2019;, transl. George Ciccariello-Maher, <i>Transmodernity: Journal of Peripheral Cultural Production of the Luso-Hispanic World</i> 1: 3 (2012).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-37" id="ch4ft37">37</a>.</span>Jullien, <i>On the Universal</i>, p. 92.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-38" id="ch4ft38">38</a>.</span>Jullien argues that Islamic thought does have a degree of ethico-political universal normativity, but this is in any case significantly less apparent than that emerging from European modernity and is qualified by the priority given to community (ibid., p. 74). John Hobson, <i>The Eastern Origins of Western Civilisation</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004); Amartya Sen, &#x2018;East and West: The Reach of Reason&#x2019;, <i>New York Review of Books</i> 47: 12 (2000).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-39" id="ch4ft39">39</a>.</span>&#x2018;The project of provincializing Europe cannot &#x2026; originate from the stance that the reason/science/universals that help define Europe as the modern are simply &#x201C;culture-specific&#x201D; and therefore only belong to the European cultures. [This] simple rejection of modernity would be, in many situations, politically suicidal.&#x2019; Dipesh Chakrabarty, <i>Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Difference</i> (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007), pp. 43&#x2013;5; Matin, &#x2018;Redeeming the Universal, Duy Lap Nguyen, &#x2018;The Universal Province of Modernity&#x2019;, <i>Interventions</i> 16: 3 (2014), p. 447; Mignolo, <i>Darker Side of Western Modernity</i>, p. 275.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-40" id="ch4ft40">40</a>.</span>There have been a number of alternative approaches posed in light of the critiques of classic substantialist universalism. We will not elaborate on them here, but a few quick comments are in order. &#x2018;Negative universalism&#x2019; grounds universalism on a common opposition, but this remains a folk-political, defensive and negative approach. It does not elaborate an alternative future. &#x2018;Minimal universalism&#x2019; argues <a id="page_200"/>for a few basic principles common to all, but is simply a reduced version of classical universalism and remains subject to all its problems. Finally, &#x2018;pluri-versalism&#x2019; is the most intriguing perspective, and the one we would most closely align with. It argues for self-determination of cultures in mutual horizontal engagement. But it requires three quick comments. First, it neglects the medium of engagement between cultures, which we argue requires a sophisticated theory of reasoning in order to avoid domination. (See Anthony Laden&#x2019;s work for a non-dominating and collective conception of reasoning.) Secondly, it rightly opposes a homogeneous vision of universalism, but overlooks the ways in which universalism can already incorporate the sorts of differences it highlights. Pluri-versalism too easily suggests neglecting the common aspect required in a globalised world. Humanity exists not simply as mutually exclusive ways of being, but instead as a deeply intertwined set of differences. Thirdly, pluri-versalism recognises that capitalist universalism needs to be eliminated first in order for it to stand a chance. Until then, it is bound to resistance and defensive gestures against expansionary capitalism. Pluri-versalism thus relies upon the elimination of capitalism and is dependent upon a counter-hegemonic postcapitalist project as its presupposed condition of existence. The problem of universalism &#x2013; especially actually-existing universalism &#x2013; cannot be dispensed with by theoretical fiat. Grosfoguel, &#x2018;Decolonizing Western Uni-Versalisms&#x2019;, p. 101; Bhikhu Parekh, &#x2018;Non-Ethnocentric Universalism&#x2019;, in Tim Dunne and Nicholas J. Wheeler, eds, <i>Human Rights in Global Politics</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), pp. 128&#x2013;59; Mignolo, <i>Darker Side of Western Modernity</i>, p. 275; Anthony Simon Laden, <i>Reasoning: A Social Picture</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-41" id="ch4ft41">41</a>.</span>Ernesto Laclau, &#x2018;Identity and Hegemony: The Role of Universality in the Constitution of Political Logics&#x2019;, in Judith Butler, Ernesto Laclau and Slavoj &#x017D;i&#x017E;ek, eds, <i>Contingency, Hegemony and Universality: Contemporary Dialogues on the Left</i> (London: Verso, 2011).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-42" id="ch4ft42">42</a>.</span>Nora Sternfeld, &#x2018;Whose Universalism Is It?&#x2019;, transl. Mary O&#x2019;Neill, 2007, at <a href="http://eipcp.net">eipcp.net</a>; Jullien, <i>On the Universal</i>, p. 92.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-43" id="ch4ft43">43</a>.</span>Butler, &#x2018;Restaging the Universal: Hegemony and the Limits of Formalism&#x2019;, in Butler et al., <i>Contingency, Hegemony and Universality</i>, pp. 33.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-44" id="ch4ft44">44</a>.</span>Stefan Jonsson, &#x2018;The Ideology of Universalism&#x2019;, <i>New Left Review</i> II/63 (May&#x2013;June 2010), p. 117.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-45" id="ch4ft45">45</a>.</span>Matin, &#x2018;Redeeming the Universal&#x2019;.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-46" id="ch4ft46">46</a>.</span>For the classic reference point on negative freedom, see Isaiah Berlin, &#x2018;Two Concepts of Liberty&#x2019;, in Henry Hardy, ed., <i>Liberty</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-47" id="ch4ft47">47</a>.</span>Milton Friedman, <i>Capitalism and Freedom: Fortieth Anniversary Edition</i> (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002), Chapter 1.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-48" id="ch4ft48">48</a>.</span>Friedrich Hayek, <i>The Constitution of Liberty</i> (London: Routledge, 2006).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-49" id="ch4ft49">49</a>.</span>This has overlaps with Philippe van Parijs&#x2019;s (as well as many other theorists&#x2019;) distinction between formal and real freedom, but the notion of &#x2018;synthetic&#x2019; freedom highlights that it is not a natural aspect of humanity, but something constructed. See Philippe Van Parijs, <i>Real Freedom for All: What (If Anything) Can Justify Capitalism?</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997), pp. 21&#x2013;4.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_201"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-50" id="ch4ft50">50</a>.</span>Daniel Ravent&#x00F3;s, <i>Basic Income: The Material Conditions of Freedom</i>, transl. Julie Wark (London: Pluto, 2007), p. 68; Mignolo, <i>Darker Side of Western Modernity</i>, pp. 300&#x2013;1.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-51" id="ch4ft51">51</a>.</span>Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, <i>The German Ideology</i> (London: Prometheus, 1976), p. 44.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-52" id="ch4ft52">52</a>.</span>Steven Lukes, <i>Power: A Radical View</i>, 2nd edn (Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005), p. 65.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-53" id="ch4ft53">53</a>.</span>As Erik Olin Wright puts it, &#x2018;The idea of &#x201C;flourishing&#x201D; includes not just the development of human intellectual, psychological and social capacities during childhood, but also the lifelong opportunity to exercise those capacities, and to develop new capacities as life circumstances change.&#x2019; Erik Olin Wright, <i>Envisioning Real Utopias</i> (London: Verso, 2010), pp. 47&#x2013;8.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-54" id="ch4ft54">54</a>.</span>There is no strict order of preference for these three elements, even though the remainder of this book will focus predominantly on the first.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-55" id="ch4ft55">55</a>.</span>Alex Gourevitch, &#x2018;Labor Republicanism and the Transformation of Work&#x2019;, <i>Political Theory</i> 41: 4 (2013), p. 597.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-56" id="ch4ft56">56</a>.</span>Slavoj &#x017D;i&#x017E;ek, &#x2018;Utopia and Its Discontents&#x2019;, interview with Slawomir Sierakowski, 23 February 2015, at <a href="http://lareviewofbooks.org">lareviewofbooks.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-57" id="ch4ft57">57</a>.</span>Karl Marx, <i>Wage-Labour and Capital &#x0026; Value, Price and Profit</i> (New York: International Publishers, 1976), p. 54; <i>Grundrisse: Introduction to the Critique of Political Economy</i>, transl. Martin Nicolaus (Middlesex: Penguin, 1973), p. 706; and <i>Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume III</i> (London: Lawrence &#x0026; Wishart, 1977), p. 820.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-58" id="ch4ft58">58</a>.</span>There is an alternative republican argument for this position, which rightly argues that wage labour involves domination (as distinct from interference), and that only the provision of the basic means of existence enables us to overcome this domination. This tradition has a long line of thinkers associated with it, from Aristotle to Robespierre to nineteenth-century labour activists. While we will not rely on it here to support the argument for a post-work society, it nevertheless has important contributions to make over and above liberal conceptions of freedom. See Ravent&#x00F3;s, <i>Basic Income</i>, Chapter 3; Gourevitch, &#x2018;Labor Republicanism and the Transformation of Work&#x2019;, pp. 593&#x2013;8.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-59" id="ch4ft59">59</a>.</span>Antonella Corsani, &#x2018;Beyond the Myth of Woman: The Becoming-Transfeminist of (Post-)Marxism&#x2019;, transl. Timothy S. Murphy, <i>SubStance</i> 36: 1 (2007), p. 127.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-60" id="ch4ft60">60</a>.</span>For this argument, see Parijs, <i>Real Freedom for All</i>, pp. 17&#x2013;20.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-61" id="ch4ft61">61</a>.</span>This shares similarities with the ideas of power-with and power-to. See Uri Gordon, <i>Anarchy Alive! Anti-Authoritarian Politics from Practice to Theory</i> (London: Pluto Press, 2007), pp. 54&#x2013;5; John Holloway, <i>Change the World Without Taking Power: The Meaning of Revolution Today</i> (London/Sterling, VA: Pluto, 2002), p. 28.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-62" id="ch4ft62">62</a>.</span>Laden, <i>Reasoning</i>, pp. 14&#x2013;23; Gordon, <i>Anarchy Alive!</i>, p. 54.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-63" id="ch4ft63">63</a>.</span>For the notion of language as cognitive scaffolding, see Andy Clark, <i>Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Action, and Cognitive Extension</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008), Chapter 3.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-64" id="ch4ft64">64</a>.</span>Cited in Gregory Elliott, <i>Althusser: The Detour of Theory</i> (Leiden: Brill, 2006), p. 16.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-65" id="ch4ft65">65</a>.</span>Krafft Ehricke, &#x2018;The Extraterrestrial Imperative&#x2019;, <i>Air University Review</i>, February 1978.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_202"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-66" id="ch4ft66">66</a>.</span>Marx and Engels, <i>German Ideology</i>, p. 44.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-67" id="ch4ft67">67</a>.</span>For a defence of this Promethean spirit, see Ray Brassier, &#x2018;Prometheanism and Its Critics&#x2019;, in Robin Mackay and Armen Avanessian, eds, <i>#Accelerate: The Accelerationist Reader</i> (Falmouth: Urbanomic, 2014).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-68" id="ch4ft68">68</a>.</span>For an earlier, historicized interpretation of our cyborg nature, see Donna Haraway, &#x2018;A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century&#x2019;, in <i>Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature</i> (London: Free Association Books, 1991). For a contemporary updating, see the Laboria Cuboniks manifesto in Helen Hester and Armen Avanessian, eds, <i>Dea Ex Machina</i> (Berlin: Merve Verlag, 2015).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-69" id="ch4ft69">69</a>.</span>Benedict Singleton, &#x2018;Maximum Jailbreak&#x2019;, in Mackay and Avanessian, <i>#Accelerate</i>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-70" id="ch4ft70">70</a>.</span>Alfred Schmidt, <i>The Concept of Nature in Marx</i> (London: Verso, 2014), pp. 144&#x2013;5.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-71" id="ch4ft71">71</a>.</span>Sadie Plant, &#x2018;Binary Sexes, Binary Codes&#x2019;, 3 June 1996, at <a href="http://future-nonstop.org">future-nonstop.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-72" id="ch4ft72">72</a>.</span>Reza Negarestani, &#x2018;The Labor of the Inhuman&#x2019;, in Mackay and Avanessian, <i>#Accelerate</i>, 452.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-73" id="ch4ft73">73</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 438.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-74" id="ch4ft74">74</a>.</span>For examples of these parochial defences, see J&#x00FC;rgen Habermas, <i>The Future of Human Nature</i> (Cambridge: Polity, 2003); Francis Fukuyama, <i>Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the Biotechnology Revolution</i> (London: Profile, 2003).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-75" id="ch4ft75">75</a>.</span>For two fascinating accounts of bodily experimentation, see Shannon Bell, <i>Fast Feminism</i> (New York: Autonomedia, 2010); and Beatriz Preciado, <i>Testo Junkie: Sex, Drugs and Biopolitics in the Pharmacopornographic Era</i> (New York: Feminist Press CUNY, 2013).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-76" id="ch4ft76">76</a>.</span>The remainder of this book will be concerned mostly with the first two aspects of synthetic freedom: the basic conditions of existence, and the collective capacities to act. We will, however, return to the technological augmentation of humanity in the Conclusion.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="10_Chapter4Grigo7864rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch4ft-77" id="ch4ft77">77</a>.</span>Susan Buck-Morss, <i>Hegel, Haiti, and Universal History</i> (Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2009), p. 106.</p><p class="sub"><b>5. THE FUTURE ISN&#x2019;T WORKING</b></p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-1" id="ch5ft1">1</a>.</span>Two recent manifestos from India and Germany have also attacked the glorification of work: Kamunist Kranti, &#x2018;A Ballad Against Work&#x2019;, 1997, at <a href="http://libcom.org">libcom.org</a>; and Krisis-Group, &#x2018;Manifesto Against Labour&#x2019;, 1999, at <a href="http://krisis.org">krisis.org</a>.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-2" id="ch5ft2">2</a>.</span>Karl Marx, <i>Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume III</i> (London: Lawrence &#x0026; Wishart, 1977), p. 820.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-3" id="ch5ft3">3</a>.</span>Research suggests that changes in opportunities (provided by moments such as an economic crisis) are far more important than the level of grievances in generating a social movement. In other words, the idea that making things worse will lead to revolution has little empirical support. Sidney Tarrow, <i>Power in Movement: Social Movements and Contentious Politics</i>, 2nd edn (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), Chapter 5.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-4" id="ch5ft4">4</a>.</span>Karl Marx, <i>Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume I</i>, transl. Ben Fowkes (London: Penguin, 1990), Part 8.</p><p class="note1"><a id="page_203"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-5" id="ch5ft5">5</a>.</span>Michael Perelman, <i>The Invention of Capitalism: Classical Political Economy and the Secret History of Primitive Accumulation</i> (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2000), p. 14.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-6" id="ch5ft6">6</a>.</span>As Marx writes, &#x2018;&#x201C;Proletarian&#x201D; must be understood to mean, economically speaking, nothing other than &#x201C;wage-labourer&#x201D;, the man who produces and valorises &#x201C;capital&#x201D;, and <i>is thrown onto the street as soon as he becomes superfluous to the need for valorisation</i>.&#x2019; Marx, <i>Capital, Volume I</i>, p. 764 n. 1 (emphasis added).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-7" id="ch5ft7">7</a>.</span>In the case of groups like unpaid domestic labourers, the proletariat can also rely upon the wages of another for its survival, along with all the problematic dependencies this fosters. In this case, the proletariat is <i>indirectly</i> reliant upon waged labour for its survival.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-8" id="ch5ft8">8</a>.</span>Richard Freeman, &#x2018;The Great Doubling: The Challenge of the New Global Labor Market&#x2019;, in John Edwards, Marion Crain and Arne Kalleberg, eds, <i>Ending Poverty in America: How to Restore the American Dream</i> (New York: New Press, 2007).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-9" id="ch5ft9">9</a>.</span>Steve Fraser, <i>The Age of Acquiescence: The Life and Death of American Resistance to Organized Wealth and Power</i> (New York: Little, Brown US, 2015), p. 60.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-10" id="ch5ft10">10</a>.</span>The problem of how to define the surplus population is one which is often assumed away in the literature. But there are important issues here that cannot simply be passed by. If the surplus is defined in terms of waged versus non-waged, then are working prison populations not part of the surplus? What about the vast amounts of informal labour that works for a wage and produces for a market? Other problems arise if one defines the surplus in terms of productive and unproductive labour. In particular, one is led to the conclusion Negri and Hardt draw &#x2013; that since socially productive labour exists everywhere under conditions of post-Fordism, the term no longer has meaning. (Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, <i>Multitude: War and Democracy in the Age of Empire</i> [New York: Penguin, 2005], p. 131.) We reject that conclusion and attempt to demonstrate here that the concept still has important analytical and explanatory utility. We believe that the surplus can be defined as those who are outside of waged labour under capitalist conditions of production. The latter qualification means that most informal labour (not under capitalist conditions of production) is included in the category. We are particularly influenced here by the work of Kalyan Sanyal.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-11" id="ch5ft11">11</a>.</span>Joan Robinson, <i>Economic Philosophy</i> (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1964), p. 46.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-12" id="ch5ft12">12</a>.</span>In economics this is associated with the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU). Hiring workers when unemployment is at this level is thought to raise wages and eventually cause inflation, thereby setting a floor to how low the unemployment rate should go.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-13" id="ch5ft13">13</a>.</span>For classic statements about the political uses of unemployment, see Micha&#x0142; Kalecki, &#x2018;Political Aspects of Full Employment&#x2019;, <i>Political Quarterly</i> 14: 4 (1943); Samuel Bowles, &#x2018;The Production Process in a Competitive Economy: Walrasian, Neo-Hobbesian, and Marxian Models&#x2019;, <i>American Economic Review</i> 75: 1 (1985).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-14" id="ch5ft14">14</a>.</span>This emphasis on secular trends, we would argue, is one of the unique characteristics of a Marxist understanding of unemployment.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-15" id="ch5ft15">15</a>.</span>The fear of automation taking jobs has a long history, of which the Luddites were one of the earliest examples. More recently this fear was a major issue in the 1960s <a id="page_204"/>with discussions about the idea of cybernation and in the 1980s and 1990s with headline-grabbing journalistic commentary, and has re-emerged again over the past few years. The large number of relevant texts include: Ad Hoc Committee, &#x2018;The Triple Revolution&#x2019;, <i>International Socialist Review</i> 24: 3 (1964); Donald Michael, <i>Cybernation: The Silent Conquest</i> (Santa Barbara, CA: Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions, 1962); Paul Mattick, &#x2018;The Economics of Cybernation&#x2019;, <i>New Politics</i> 1: 4 (1962); David Noble, <i>Progress Without People: In Defense of Luddism</i> (Toronto: Between the Lines, 1995); Jeremy Rifkin, <i>The End of Work: The Decline of the Global Labor Force and the Dawn of the Post-Market Era</i> (New York: Putnam, 1997); Martin Ford, <i>The Lights in the Tunnel: Automation, Accelerating Technology and the Economy of the Future</i> (US: CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2009); Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, <i>The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies</i> (New York: W. W. Norton, 2014).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-16" id="ch5ft16">16</a>.</span>These estimates are for the US and European labour markets, though similar numbers undoubtedly hold globally and, as we argue later, may even be worse in developing economies. Carl Benedikt Frey and Michael Osborne, <i>The Future of Employment: How Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerisation?</i> 2013, pdf available at <a href="http://oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk">oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk</a>; Jeremy Bowles, &#x2018;The Computerisation of European Jobs&#x2019;, <i>Bruegel</i> (2014), at <a href="http://bruegel.org">bruegel.org</a>; Stuart Elliott, &#x2018;Anticipating a Luddite Revival&#x2019;, <i>Issues in Science and Technology</i> 30: 3 (2014).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-17" id="ch5ft17">17</a>.</span>Karl Marx, <i>Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume I</i>, transl. Ben Fowkes (London: Penguin, 1990), p. 566&#x2013;7.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-18" id="ch5ft18">18</a>.</span>Paul Einzig, <i>The Economic Consequences of Automation</i> (New York: W. W. Norton, 1957), p. 78.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-19" id="ch5ft19">19</a>.</span>Thor Berger and Carl Benedikt Frey, <i>Technology Shocks and Urban Evolutions: Did the Computer Revolution Shift the Fortunes of US Cities?</i> (Oxford Martin School Working Paper, 2014), p. 6.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-20" id="ch5ft20">20</a>.</span>James Bessen, &#x2018;Toil and Technology&#x2019;, <i>Finance &#x0026; Development</i> 52: 1 (2015), p. 17.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-21" id="ch5ft21">21</a>.</span>Evidence already suggests that the global density of bank branches is retreating. Carl Benedikt Frey and Michael Osborne, <i>Technology at Work: The Future of Innovation and Employment</i> (Citi &#x2013; Global Perspectives and Solutions, 2015), pp. 25&#x2013;6, pdf available at <a href="http://ir.citi.com">ir.citi.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-22" id="ch5ft22">22</a>.</span>Wassily Leontief, &#x2018;National Perspectives: The Definition of Problems and Opportunities&#x2019;, in <i>The Long-Term Impact of Technology on Employment and Unemployment</i>, a National Academy of Engineering symposium (1983).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-23" id="ch5ft23">23</a>.</span>There is some evidence for this currently happening, with businesses reporting difficulties in finding skilled workers and rising wage disparities within occupations between the most and least skilled. Bessen, &#x2018;Toil and Technology&#x2019;, p. 19.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-24" id="ch5ft24">24</a>.</span>Boyan Jovanovic and Peter L. Rousseau, <i>General Purpose Technologies</i>, Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, January 2005, at <a href="http://nber.org">nber.org</a>; George Terbough, <i>The Automation Hysteria: An Appraisal of the Alarmist View of the Technological Revolution</i> (New York: W. W. Norton, 1966), pp. 54&#x2013;5; Aaron Benanav and Endnotes, &#x2018;Misery and Debt&#x2019;, in <i>Endnotes 2: Misery and the Value Form</i> (London: Endnotes, 2010), p. 31.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_205"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-25" id="ch5ft25">25</a>.</span>Barry Eichengreen, <i>Secular Stagnation: The Long View</i> (Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, January 2015), p. 5, pdf available at <a href="http://nber.org">nber.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-26" id="ch5ft26">26</a>.</span>Kalyan Sanyal, <i>Rethinking Capitalist Development: Primitive Accumulation, Governmentality and Post-Colonial Capitalism</i> (New Delhi: Routledge India, 2013), p. 55. Notably, this means that this economic sector is eminently contemporary, rather than being a residue of some pre-capitalist mode of production.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-27" id="ch5ft27">27</a>.</span>Gabriel Wildau, &#x2018;China Migration: At the Turning Point&#x2019;, <i>Financial Times</i>, 4 May 2015, at <a href="http://ft.com">ft.com</a>; &#x2018;Global Labor Glut Sinking Wages Means U.S. Needs to Get Schooled&#x2019;, <i>Bloomberg</i>, 4 May 2015, at <a href="http://bloomberg.com">bloomberg.com</a>. While Africa has yet to be fully integrated into the global capitalist system, it is worth emphasising that the integration of China and the post-Soviet states was a one-off surge in the global labour force. The trend from here on out will be a general decline in the importance of this mechanism for producing surplus populations.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-28" id="ch5ft28">28</a>.</span>We note here that while the first two mechanisms are integral to capitalist accumulation (changes in the productive forces and the expansion of capitalist social relations), the third is a logic distinct from just accumulation. The empirical characteristics of this group also change over time (as with, for instance, the integration of women into the workforce over the past four decades). Lynda Yanz and David Smith, &#x2018;Women as a Reserve Army of Labour: A Critique&#x2019;, <i>Review of Radical Political Economics</i> 15:1 (1983), p. 104.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-29" id="ch5ft29">29</a>.</span>In other words, these dominations can often be functional for capitalism, even if their function does not explain their genesis.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-30" id="ch5ft30">30</a>.</span>A full 36 million people are considered to be in slavery today: <i>Global Slavery Index 2014</i> (Dalkeith, Western Australia: Walk Free Foundation, 2014).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-31" id="ch5ft31">31</a>.</span>Edward E. Baptist, <i>Half Has Never Been Told: Slavery and the Making of American Capitalism</i> (New York: Basic Books, 2014); Silvia Federici, &#x2018;Wages Against Housework&#x2019;, in <i>Revolution at Point Zero: Housework, Reproduction, and Feminist Struggle</i> (Oakland, CA: PM Press, 2012).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-32" id="ch5ft32">32</a>.</span>In terms of global unemployment, women have faced the brunt of the crisis in recent years. ILO, <i>World Employment and Social Outlook: The Changing Nature of Jobs</i> (Geneva: International Labour Organization, 2015), p. 18.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-33" id="ch5ft33">33</a>.</span>For example, black males in the United States were particularly affected by the automation and outsourcing of manufacturing. William Julius Wilson, <i>When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor</i> (New York: Vintage Books, 1997), pp. 29&#x2013;31.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-34" id="ch5ft34">34</a>.</span>Michael McIntyre, &#x2018;Race, Surplus Population, and the Marxist Theory of Imperialism&#x2019;, <i>Antipode</i> 43:5 (2011), p. 1500&#x2013;2.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-35" id="ch5ft35">35</a>.</span>These draw broadly upon the divisions Marx drew between the floating/reserve army, latent and stagnant, but are here offered as an updating of his historical example.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-36" id="ch5ft36">36</a>.</span>Gary Fields, <i>Working Hard, Working Poor: A Global Journey</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012), p. 46.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-37" id="ch5ft37">37</a>.</span>This is what Kalyan Sanyal describes as &#x2018;need economies&#x2019;. See Sanyal, <i>Rethinking Capitalist Development</i>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-38" id="ch5ft38">38</a>.</span>The area of &#x2018;vulnerable employment&#x2019; now accounts for 48 per cent of global employment &#x2013; five times higher than pre-crisis levels. This number is also thought to <a id="page_206"/>underestimate the amount of vulnerably employed, given its informal, off-the-books nature. ILO, <i>Global Employment Trends 2014: Risk of a Jobless Recovery?</i> (Geneva: International Labour Organization, 2014), p. 12; David Neilson and Thomas Stubbs, &#x2018;Relative Surplus Population and Uneven Development in the Neoliberal Era: Theory and Empirical Application&#x2019;, <i>Capital &#x0026; Class</i> 35 (2011), p. 443.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-39" id="ch5ft39">39</a>.</span>In Marx&#x2019;s schema, this can be understood as C-M-C, where commodities are produced and sold on the market in order to receive money to buy goods for subsistence. This differs from pre-capitalist subsistence economies in that goods are not produced for personal consumption, but instead must be mediated through the market. Sanyal, <i>Rethinking Capitalist Development</i>, pp. 69&#x2013;70.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-40" id="ch5ft40">40</a>.</span>Michael Denning, &#x2018;Wageless Life&#x2019;, <i>New Left Review</i> II/66 (November&#x2013;December 2010), p. 86; ILO, <i>G20 Labour Markets: Outlook, Key Challenges and Policy Responses</i> (Geneva: International Labour Organization/OECD/World Bank, 2014), at <a href="http://ilo.org">ilo.org</a>, p. 8.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-41" id="ch5ft41">41</a>.</span>Marilyn Power, &#x2018;From Home Production to Wage Labor: Women as a Reserve Army of Labor&#x2019;, <i>Review of Radical Political Economics</i> 15:1 (1983).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-42" id="ch5ft42">42</a>.</span>David Harvey, <i>A Companion to Marx&#x2019;s Capital, Volume 1</i> (London: Verso, 2010), p. 280.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-43" id="ch5ft43">43</a>.</span>ILO, <i>Key Indicators of the Labour Market, 8th edn</i> (Geneva: International Labour Organization, 2013), at <a href="http://ilo.org">ilo.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-44" id="ch5ft44">44</a>.</span><i>State of the Global Workplace: Employee Engagement Insights for Business Leaders Worldwide</i>, Gallup, 2013, at <a href="http://ihrim.org">ihrim.org</a>, p. 27; John Bellamy Foster, Robert W. McChesney and R. Jamil Jonna, &#x2018;The Global Reserve Army of Labor and the New Imperialism&#x2019;, <i>Monthly Review</i>, November 2011; Neilson and Stubbs, &#x2018;Relative Surplus Population&#x2019;. The International Labour Organization currently estimates that 5.9 per cent of the working population (201 million people) are unemployed &#x2013; but this relies on a very stringent definition of unemployment. ILO, <i>World Employment and Social Outlook &#x2013; Trends 2015</i> (Geneva: International Labour Organization, 2015), at <a href="http://ilo.org">ilo.org</a>, p. 16. If one works for an hour mowing a lawn, makes a few dollars selling homemade wares on a street, or has a doctorate and works in a call centre, the ILO counts this as employment. In other words, part-time workers, informal workers and underemployed workers all count as employed. The ILO definition of unemployment also <i>improves</i> when people drop out of the labour force: a smaller workforce means lower unemployment. A more meaningful measure is therefore the level of employment among the working-age population, according to which the ILO estimates that over 40 per cent of the world&#x2019;s population is not employed. ILO, <i>Global Employment Trends 2014</i>, p. 18. In a similar measure, they estimate that only half the global labour force is in waged or salaried work. ILO, <i>World Employment and Social Outlook: The Changing Nature of Jobs</i> (Geneva: International Labour Organization, 2015), p. 28. But these measures still overestimate the number of people employed, and so other measures have attempted to overcome these deficiencies. Gallup, for instance, defines &#x2018;employment&#x2019; as formal work for thirty hours or more per week &#x2013; and concludes that 74 per cent of the global labour force fails to meet this definition. <i>State of the Global Workplace: Employee Engagement Insights for Business Leaders Worldwide</i>, Gallup, 2013, pdf available at <a id="page_207"/><a href="http://ihrim.org">ihrim.org</a>, p. 27. Another study, based on ILO data on the unemployed, vulnerably employed and economically inactive, estimates the surplus population at 61 per cent of the total working-age population (calculated from data by Neilson and Stubbs, &#x2018;Relative Surplus Population, p. 444). The conclusion to draw from these alternative measures is simple: the global surplus population is massive, and in fact outnumbers the formal working class.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-45" id="ch5ft45">45</a>.</span>Frantz Fanon, <i>The Wretched of the Earth</i>, transl. Constance Farrington (London: Penguin Classics, 2001), Chapter 2; Patricia Connelly, <i>Last Hired First Fired: Women and the Canadian Work Force</i> (Toronto: The Women&#x2019;s Press, 1978).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-46" id="ch5ft46">46</a>.</span>Cleaver here uses the term &#x2018;Lumpen&#x2019; to refer to what we have called the &#x2018;proletariat&#x2019; condition. Eldridge Cleaver, &#x2018;On Lumpen Ideology&#x2019;, <i>The Black Scholar</i>, 4:3 (1972), pp. 9&#x2013;10.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-47" id="ch5ft47">47</a>.</span>Mattick, &#x2018;Economics of Cybernation&#x2019;, p. 19.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-48" id="ch5ft48">48</a>.</span>Benanav and Endnotes, &#x2018;Misery and Debt&#x2019;; Fredric Jameson, <i>Representing Capital: A Reading of Volume One</i> (London: Verso, 2011), p. 2. Broadly speaking, we can discern two ways in which the concept of surplus populations has functioned in recent debates. One set of arguments is concerned with the overlapping of particular social groups (for example, black minorities) with the concept of the surplus population. Another, much smaller, set of arguments has been interested in the claim that the surplus population has a secular trend to grow in size.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-49" id="ch5ft49">49</a>.</span>Marx, <i>Capital, Volume I</i>, p. 798.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-50" id="ch5ft50">50</a>.</span>Richard Duboff, &#x2018;Full Employment: The History of a Receding Target&#x2019;, <i>Politics &#x0026; Society</i> 7: 1 (1977), pp. 7&#x2013;8.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-51" id="ch5ft51">51</a>.</span>While NAIRU is debatable as a measure of full employment, the postwar period saw unemployment typically below NAIRU, and the neoliberal period has seen unemployment consistently above NAIRU. Jared Bernstein and Dean Baker, &#x2018;Full Employment: The Recovery&#x2019;s Missing Ingredient&#x2019;, <i>Washington Post</i>, 3 November 2014, p. 10; Jos&#x00E9; Nun, &#x2018;The End of Work and the &#x201C;Marginal Mass&#x201D; Thesis&#x2019;, <i>Latin American Perspectives</i> 27: 1 (2000), p. 8; Guy Standing, <i>The Precariat: The New Dangerous Class</i> (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2011), pp. 46&#x2013;7; Jeffrey Straussman, &#x2018;The &#x201C;Reserve Army&#x201D; of Unemployed Revisited&#x2019;, <i>Society</i> 14: 3 (1977), p. 42.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-52" id="ch5ft52">52</a>.</span><i>Economic Projections of Federal Reserve Board Members and Federal Reserve Bank Presidents, December 2014</i>, Federal Reserve Board, 2014, pdf available at <a href="http://federal-reserve.gov">federal-reserve.gov</a>, p. 1.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-53" id="ch5ft53">53</a>.</span>Claire Cain Miller, &#x2018;As Robots Grow Smarter, American Workers Struggle to Keep Up&#x2019;, <i>New York Times</i>, 15 December 2014.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-54" id="ch5ft54">54</a>.</span>Bureau of Labor Statistics, &#x2018;Civilian Employment&#x2013;Population Ratio&#x2019;, Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis, 2014, at <a href="http://research.stlouisfed.org">research.stlouisfed.org</a>; Deepankar Basu, <i>The Reserve Army of Labour in the Postwar US Economy: Some Stock and Flow Estimates</i>, Working Paper (Amherst: University of Massachusetts, 2012), p. 7.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-55" id="ch5ft55">55</a>.</span>ILO, <i>Global Employment Trends 2014</i>, p. 17.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-56" id="ch5ft56">56</a>.</span>The job growth rate dropped from 1.7 per cent between 1991 and 2007 to 1.2 per cent between 2007 and 2014. ILO, <i>World Employment and Social Outlook</i>, p. 16; ILO, <i>World Employment and Social Outlook</i>, p. 29.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_208"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-57" id="ch5ft57">57</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 20.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-58" id="ch5ft58">58</a>.</span>Workers in developing economies, of course, have long lived under conditions of precarity. The new concern for precarity is therefore a symptom of the collapse of a model of work peculiar to developed economies in the postwar period.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-59" id="ch5ft59">59</a>.</span>A more thorough exploration of these characteristics can be found in Standing, <i>Precariat</i>, pp. 10&#x2013;11.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-60" id="ch5ft60">60</a>.</span>Marx, <i>Capital, Volume I</i>, p. 789.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-61" id="ch5ft61">61</a>.</span>Francis Green, Tarek Mostafa, Agn&#x00E8;s Parent-Thirion, Greet Vermeylen, Gijs van Houten, Isabella Biletta and Maija Lyly-Yrjanainen, &#x2018;Is Job Quality Becoming More Unequal?&#x2019;, <i>Industrial &#x0026; Labor Relations Review</i> 66: 4 (2013), pp. 770&#x2013;1; Andrew Glyn, <i>Capitalism Unleashed: Finance, Globalization, and Welfare</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007), p. 114.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-62" id="ch5ft62">62</a>.</span>Carrie Gleason and Susan Lambert, <i>Uncertainty by the Hour</i>, pp. 1&#x2013;3, pdf available at <a href="http://opensocietyfoundations.org">opensocietyfoundations.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-63" id="ch5ft63">63</a>.</span>While this aspect of precarity has often been emphasised, irregular work still remains a small portion of the labour market in most advanced capitalist countries. Kim Moody, &#x2018;Precarious Work, &#x201C;Compression&#x201D; and Class Struggle &#x201C;Leaps&#x201D;&#x2019;, <i>RS21</i>, 10 February 2015, at <a href="http://rs21.org.uk">rs21.org.uk</a>. It is estimated that about a quarter of workers in developed economies are on temporary contracts or without a contract. ILO, <i>World Employment and Social Outlook</i>, p. 30.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-64" id="ch5ft64">64</a>.</span><i>Self-Employed Workers in the UK &#x2013; 2014</i> (London: Office for National Statistics, 2014), pdf available at <a href="http://ons.gov.uk">ons.gov.uk</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-65" id="ch5ft65">65</a>.</span>Bureau of Labor Statistics, &#x2018;Employment Level &#x2013; Part-Time for Economic Reasons, All Industries&#x2019;.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-66" id="ch5ft66">66</a>.</span>Official business surveys find that 1.4 million people are working under zero-hours contracts in the UK. See <i>Analysis of Employee Contracts that Do Not Guarantee a Minimum Number of Hours</i> (London: Office for National Statistics, 30 April 2014), pdf available at <a href="http://ons.gov.uk">ons.gov.uk</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-67" id="ch5ft67">67</a>.</span>Dean Baker and Jared Bernstein, <i>Getting Back to Full Employment: A Better Bargain for Working People</i> (Washington, DC: Center for Economic and Policy Research, 2013), p. 12.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-68" id="ch5ft68">68</a>.</span>Bernstein and Baker, &#x2018;Full Employment&#x2019;.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-69" id="ch5ft69">69</a>.</span>In a poll of mainstream economic experts, a weighted 43 per cent of respondents agreed that technology played a central role in wage stagnation, versus 28 per cent who disagreed. &#x2018;Poll Results: Robots&#x2019;, <i>IGM Forum</i>, 25 February 2014, at <a href="http://igmchicago.org">igmchicago.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-70" id="ch5ft70">70</a>.</span>ILO, <i>G20 Labour Markets</i>, p. 5; <i>The Slow Recovery of the Labor Market</i>, US Congressional Budget Office, February 2014, at <a href="http://cbo.gov">cbo.gov</a>, p. 6; Ciaren Taylor, Andrew Jowett and Michael Hardie, &#x2018;An Examination of Falling Real Wages, 2010&#x2013;2013&#x2019; (London: Office for National Statistics, 2014), at <a href="http://ons.gov.uk">ons.gov.uk</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-71" id="ch5ft71">71</a>.</span>The level of personal savings in America has dropped drastically since the 1970s. US Bureau of Economic Analysis, &#x2018;Personal Saving Rate&#x2019;.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-72" id="ch5ft72">72</a>.</span>&#x2018;Share of U.S. Workers Living Paycheck to Paycheck Continues Decline from Recession-Era Peak, Finds Annual CareerBuilder Survey&#x2019;, CareerBuilder, 25 September 2013, at <a href="http://careerbuilder.com">careerbuilder.com</a>; <i>8 Million People One Paycheque Away from Losing Their Home</i>, Shelter, 11 April 2013, at <a href="http://england.shelter.org.uk">england.shelter.org.uk</a>.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_209"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-73" id="ch5ft73">73</a>.</span>Saskia Sassen, <i>Expulsions: Brutality and Complexity in the Global Economy</i> (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2014), p. 54.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-74" id="ch5ft74">74</a>.</span>Carlos Nordt, Ingeborg Warnke, Erich Seifritz and Wolfram Kawohl, &#x2018;Modelling Suicide and Unemployment: A Longitudinal Analysis Covering 63 Countries, 2000&#x2013;11&#x2019;, <i>Lancet</i>, 2015, p. 5; Justin Wolfers, <i>Is Business Cycle Volatility Costly? Evidence from Surveys of Subjective Wellbeing</i>, Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2003, at <a href="http://nber.org">nber.org</a>; Nikolaos Antonakakis and Alan Collins, &#x2018;The Impact of Fiscal Austerity on Suicide: On the Empirics of a Modern Greek Tragedy&#x2019;, <i>Social Science &#x0026; Medicine</i> 112 (July 2014); Karen McVeigh, &#x2018;DWP Urged to Publish Inquiries on Benefit Claimant Suicides&#x2019;, <i>Guardian</i>, 14 December 2014.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-75" id="ch5ft75">75</a>.</span>Ben Bernanke, &#x2018;The Jobless Recovery&#x2019;, paper presented at the Global Economic and Investment Outlook Conference, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 6 November 2003, at <a href="http://federalreserve.gov">federalreserve.gov</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-76" id="ch5ft76">76</a>.</span>Olivier Coibon, Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Dmitri Koustas, <i>Amerisclerosis? The Puzzle of Rising US Unemployment Persistence</i>, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Brookings Institution, Fall 2013, pdf available at <a href="http://brookings.edu">brookings.edu</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-77" id="ch5ft77">77</a>.</span>Natalia Kolesnikova and Yang Liu, &#x2018;Jobless Recoveries: Causes and Consequences&#x2019;, <i>Regional Economist</i>, April 2011, at <a href="http://stlouisfed.org">stlouisfed.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-78" id="ch5ft78">78</a>.</span><i>Slow Recovery of the Labor Market</i>, p. 2; Bureau of Labor Statistics, &#x2018;Employed, Usually Work Full Time&#x2019;.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-79" id="ch5ft79">79</a>.</span>ILO, <i>G20 Labour Markets</i>, p. 4.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-80" id="ch5ft80">80</a>.</span>It has been suggested that one reason for this connection is that, in the wake of a recession, firms are risk-averse in relation to hiring for occupations that are automatable. Nir Jaimovich and Henry E. Siu, <i>The Trend Is the Cycle: Job Polarization and Jobless Recoveries</i>, Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2012, at <a href="http://nber.org">nber.org</a>, p. 29.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-81" id="ch5ft81">81</a>.</span>The distinction between routine and non-routine better explains the data than either a division between low and high levels of education, or between manufacturing and service jobs. Ibid., pp. 3, 16&#x2013;19.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-82" id="ch5ft82">82</a>.</span>Over the past three decades, a full 92 per cent of the job losses in automatable mid-skill positions have occurred in the twelve months from the onset of a recession. Ibid., p. 2.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-83" id="ch5ft83">83</a>.</span>In previous recessions, the routine jobs have never returned. Ibid., p. 14.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-84" id="ch5ft84">84</a>.</span>ILO, <i>Global Employment Trends 2014</i>, pp. 11&#x2013;12; Bureau of Labor Statistics, &#x2018;Of Total Unemployed, Percent Unemployed 27 Weeks and Over&#x2019;, Federal Reserve Economic Data, Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis, 1 January 1948; Eurostat, &#x2018;Long-Term Unemployment Rate&#x2019;, <i>Eurostat</i>, 2015, at <a href="http://ec.europa.eu">ec.europa.eu</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-85" id="ch5ft85">85</a>.</span>Alan Krueger, Judd Cramer and David Cho, &#x2018;Are the Long-Term Unemployed on the Margins of the Labor Market?&#x2019;, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2014.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-86" id="ch5ft86">86</a>.</span>Lo&#x00EF;c Wacquant, &#x2018;The Rise of Advanced Marginality: Notes on Its Nature and Implications&#x2019;, <i>Acta Sociologica</i> 39: 2 (1996), p. 125; Richard Florida, Zara Matheson, Patrick Adler and Taylor Brydges, <i>The Divided City and the Shape of the New Metropolis</i>, Martin Prosperity Institute, 2014, at <a href="http://martinprosperity.org">martinprosperity.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_210"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-87" id="ch5ft87">87</a>.</span>William Julius Wilson, <i>When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor</i> (New York: Vintage Books, 1997), p. 15.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-88" id="ch5ft88">88</a>.</span>Lo&#x00EF;c Wacquant, &#x2018;Class, Race and Hyperincarceration in Revanchist America&#x2019;, <i>Socialism and Democracy</i> 28: 3 (2014), p. 46.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-89" id="ch5ft89">89</a>.</span>Frances Fox Piven and Richard Cloward, <i>Poor People&#x2019;s Movements: Why They Succeed, How They Fail</i> (New York: Random House, 1988), p. 191.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-90" id="ch5ft90">90</a>.</span>Michelle Alexander, <i>The New Jim Crow</i> (New York: New Press, 2012), p. 218.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-91" id="ch5ft91">91</a>.</span>The number of black males working in manufacturing was nearly cut in half between 1973 and 1987. Wilson, <i>When Work Disappears</i>, pp. 29&#x2013;31.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-92" id="ch5ft92">92</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 42.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-93" id="ch5ft93">93</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 19.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-94" id="ch5ft94">94</a>.</span>Wacquant, &#x2018;Rise of Advanced Marginality,&#x2019; p. 127.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-95" id="ch5ft95">95</a>.</span>While the size of the informal economy is notoriously difficult to measure, by all accounts it forms a significant part of the global economy. For an overview of methods to measure the global shadow economy, see Friedrich Schneider and Andreas Buehn, <i>Estimating the Size of the Shadow Economy: Methods, Problems, and Open Questions</i> (CESifo Working Paper Series No. 4448, 2013), pdf available at <a href="http://papers.ssrn.com">papers.ssrn.com</a>. For a more detailed, ethnographic account of one urban informal economy, see: Sudhir Alladi Venkatesh, <i>Off the Books: The Underground Economy of the Urban Poor</i> (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2006).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-96" id="ch5ft96">96</a>.</span>The United Nations suggests that two-fifths of workers in developing economies are in the informal sector, while other research notes a significant growth in this proportion between 1985 and 2007. Mike Davis, <i>Planet of Slums</i> (London: Verso, 2006), p. 176; Friedrich Schneider, <i>Outside the State: The Shadow Economy and the Shadow Economy Labour Force</i>, Working Paper, 2014, pdf available at <a href="http://econ.jku.at">econ.jku.at</a>, p. 20.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-97" id="ch5ft97">97</a>.</span>UN-Habitat, <i>The Challenge of Slums: Global Report on Human Settlements 2003</i> (Nairobi: UN-Habitat, 2003), at <a href="http://mirror.unhabitat.org">mirror.unhabitat.org</a>, p. 46.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-98" id="ch5ft98">98</a>.</span>Karl Polanyi, <i>The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of Our Time</i> (Boston, MA: Beacon, 2001), p. 41.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-99" id="ch5ft99">99</a>.</span>Jan Breman, &#x2018;Introduction: The Great Transformation in the Setting of Asia&#x2019;, in <i>Outcast Labour in Asia: Circulation and Informalization of the Workforce at the Bottom of the Economy</i> (New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2012), pp. 8&#x2013;9; Nicholas Kaldor, <i>Strategic Factors in Economic Development</i> (Ithaca, NY: New York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations, 1967).</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-100" id="ch5ft100">100</a>.</span>Jan Breman, &#x2018;A Bogus Concept?&#x2019;, <i>New Left Review</i> II/84 (November&#x2013;December 2013), p. 137.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-101" id="ch5ft101">101</a>.</span>Sukti Dasgupta and Ajit Singh, <i>Manufacturing, Services and Premature Deindustrialization in Developing Countries: A Kaldorian Analysis</i>, Working Paper Series, World Institute for Development Economics Research, 2006, at <a href="http://ideas.repec.org">ideas.repec.org</a>, p. 6; Breman, &#x2018;Introduction&#x2019;, p. 2; Fields, <i>Working Hard, Working Poor</i>, p. 58; Davis, <i>Planet of Slums</i>, p. 15.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-102" id="ch5ft102">102</a>.</span>Davis, <i>Planet of Slums</i>, p. 175; Breman, &#x2018;Introduction&#x2019;, pp. 3&#x2013;8; George Ciccariello-Maher, <i>We Created Ch&#x00E1;vez: A People&#x2019;s History of the Venezuelan Revolution</i> (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2013), Chapter 9.</p><p class="note"><a id="page_211"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-103" id="ch5ft103">103</a>.</span>Sassen, <i>Expulsions</i>, Chapter 2.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-104" id="ch5ft104">104</a>.</span>Sanyal, <i>Rethinking Capitalist Development</i>, p. 69.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-105" id="ch5ft105">105</a>.</span>Davis, <i>Planet of Slums</i>, pp. 181&#x2013;2.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-106" id="ch5ft106">106</a>.</span>Rather than a 30&#x2013;40 per cent manufacturing share of total employment, the numbers are closer to 15&#x2013;20 per cent, and manufacturing now begins to decline as a share of GDP at per capita levels of around $3,000, rather than $10,000. Dani Rodrik, &#x2018;The Perils of Premature Deindustrialization&#x2019;, <i>Project Syndicate</i>, 11 October 2013, at <a href="http://project-syndicate.org">project-syndicate.org</a>, p. 5.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-107" id="ch5ft107">107</a>.</span>Over 30 million manufacturing jobs have been lost since 1996. Erik Brynjolfsson, Andrew McAfee and Michael Spence, &#x2018;New World Order&#x2019;, <i>Foreign Affairs</i>, August 2014.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-108" id="ch5ft108">108</a>.</span>Manfred Elfstrom and Sarosh Kuruvilla, &#x2018;The Changing Nature of Labor Unrest in China&#x2019;, <i>ILR Review</i> 67: 2 (2014)</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-109" id="ch5ft109">109</a>.</span>Real wages rose by 300 per cent between 2000 and 2010. ILO, <i>Global Wage Report 2012/13: Wages and Equitable Growth</i> (Geneva: International Labour Organization, 2013), pdf available at <a href="http://ilo.org">ilo.org</a>, p. 20.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-110" id="ch5ft110">110</a>.</span>ILO, <i>Global Employment Trends 2014</i>, p. 29.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-111" id="ch5ft111">111</a>.</span>International Federation of Robotics, <i>World Robotics: Industrial Robots 2014</i> (Frankfurt: International Federation of Robotics, 2014), pdf available at <a href="http://worldrobotics.org">worldrobotics.org</a>, p. 19; Lee Chyen Yee and Clare Jim, &#x2018;Foxconn to Rely More on Robots; Could Use 1 Million in 3 Years&#x2019;, <i>Reuters</i>, 1 August 2011; &#x2018;Guangzhou Spurs Robot Use amid Rising Labor Costs&#x2019;, <i>China Daily</i>, 16 April 2014, at <a href="http://chinadaily.com.cn">chinadaily.com.cn</a>; Angelo Young, &#x2018;Nike Unloads Contract Factory Workers, Showing How Automation Is Costing Jobs of Vulnerable Emerging Market Laborers&#x2019;, <i>International Business Times</i>, 20 May 2014.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-112" id="ch5ft112">112</a>.</span><i>Majority of Large Manufacturers Are Now Planning or Considering &#x2018;Reshoring&#x2019; from China to the US</i>, Boston Consulting Group, 24 September 2013, at <a href="http://bcg.com">bcg.com</a>; Stephanie Clifford, &#x2018;US Textile Plants Return, with Floors Largely Empty of People&#x2019;, <i>New York Times</i>, 19 September 2013.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-113" id="ch5ft113">113</a>.</span>Dani Rodrik, <i>Premature Deindustrialization</i>, BREAD Working Paper No. 439, Bureau for Research and Economic Analysis of Development, 2015, at <a href="http://ipl.econ.duke.edu">ipl.econ.duke.edu</a>, p. 2.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-114" id="ch5ft114">114</a>.</span>Fiona Tregenna, <i>Manufacturing Productivity, Deindustrialization, and Reindustrialization</i>, World Institute for Development Economics Research, 2011, at <a href="http://econstor.eu">econstor.eu</a>, p. 11.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-115" id="ch5ft115">115</a>.</span>Out of a labour force of 481 million, approximately 1 million work in this sector. Fields, <i>Working Hard, Working Poor</i>, p. 51.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-116" id="ch5ft116">116</a>.</span>Frey and Osborne, <i>Technology at Work</i>, p. 62; Brynjolfsson and McAfee, <i>Second Machine Age</i>, pp. 184&#x2013;5.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-117" id="ch5ft117">117</a>.</span>Rosa Luxemburg, <i>The Accumulation of Capital</i> (London: Routledge, 2003), pp. 344&#x2013;5.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-118" id="ch5ft118">118</a>.</span>This is why, despite the massive size of China&#x2019;s proletarian population, this surplus labour supply is becoming a problem as real wages surge upwards.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-119" id="ch5ft119">119</a>.</span>G&#x00F6;ran Therborn, <i>Why Some People Are More Unemployed than Others: The Strange Paradox of Growth and Unemployment</i> (London: Verso, 1991), pp. 23&#x2013;4.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-120" id="ch5ft120">120</a>.</span>Harvey, <i>A Companion to Marx&#x2019;s Capital, Volume 1</i>, p. 280.</p><p class="note"><a id="page_212"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-121" id="ch5ft121">121</a>.</span>The political intervention to bring this about is often missed by commentators who are sanguine about the historical experience of automation. See, for example, George Terbough, <i>The Automation Hysteria: An Appraisal of the Alarmist View of the Technological Revolution</i> (New York: W. W. Norton, 1966), Chapter 5.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-122" id="ch5ft122">122</a>.</span>Lewis Corey, <i>The Decline of American Capitalism</i> (New York: Covici Friede, 1934), p. 272.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-123" id="ch5ft123">123</a>.</span>Harry Braverman, &#x2018;Automation: Promise and Menace&#x2019;, <i>American Socialist</i>, October 1955, at <a href="http://marxists.org">marxists.org</a>; Benanav and Endnotes, &#x2018;Misery and Debt&#x2019;, p. 36; Duboff, &#x2018;Full Employment&#x2019;, p. 1.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-124" id="ch5ft124">124</a>.</span>Benjamin Kline Hunnicutt, <i>Work Without End: Abandoning Shorter Hours for the Right to Work</i> (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1988), pp. 259&#x2013;60.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-125" id="ch5ft125">125</a>.</span>Pierre Dardot and Christian Laval, <i>The New Way of the World: On Neoliberal Society</i>, transl. Gregory Elliot (London: Verso, 2014), p. 67.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-126" id="ch5ft126">126</a>.</span>ILO, &#x2018;Trends&#x2019;, <i>World Employment and Social Outlook</i>, p. 23.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-127" id="ch5ft127">127</a>.</span>Peter Cappelli, &#x2018;The Path Not Studied: Schools of Dreams More Education Is Not an Economic Elixir&#x2019;, <i>Issues in Science and Technology</i>, 27 November 2013, at <a href="http://issues.org">issues.org</a>; Stanley Aronowitz, Dawn Esposito, William DiFazio and Margaret Yard, &#x2018;The Post-Work Manifesto&#x2019;, in Stanley Aronowitz and Jonathan Cutler, eds, <i>Post-Work: The Wages of Cybernation</i> (New York: Routledge, 1998), p. 48; Stefan Collini, <i>What Are Universities For?</i> (London: Penguin, 2012); Andrew McGettigan, <i>The Great University Gamble: Money, Markets and the Future of Higher Education</i> (London: Pluto Press, 2013).</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-128" id="ch5ft128">128</a>.</span>Standing, <i>Precariat</i>, p. 45.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-129" id="ch5ft129">129</a>.</span>Notably, even Paul Krugman and Lawrence Summers are doubtful that skills training will be able to solve the upcoming problems. Paul Krugman, &#x2018;Sympathy for the Luddites&#x2019;, <i>New York Times</i>, 13 June 2013; Lawrence Summers, &#x2018;Roundtable: The Future of Jobs&#x2019;, presented at The Future of Work in the Age of the Machine, Hamilton Project, Washington, DC, 19 February 2015, at <a href="http://hamiltonproject.org">hamiltonproject.org</a>.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-130" id="ch5ft130">130</a>.</span>Glyn, <i>Capitalism Unleashed</i>, pp. 27&#x2013;31.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-131" id="ch5ft131">131</a>.</span>Harvey, <i>Companion to Marx&#x2019;s Capital, Volume 1</i>, pp. 284&#x2013;5.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-132" id="ch5ft132">132</a>.</span>PMI surveys suggest the annual growth rate has been 2 per cent, which is far below what has been standard for global GDP growth. (Chris Williamson, &#x2018;January&#x2019;s PMI Surveys Signal First Global Growth Upturn for Six Months&#x2019;, <i>Markit</i>, 4 February 2015, at <a href="http://markit.com">markit.com</a>.) Other studies find that growth is higher than this, but potential output has been declining in developed economies since before the crisis, and estimates of global potential output have continually been revised down after the crisis. <i>World Economic Outlook 2015: Uneven Growth: Short- and Long-Term Factors</i> (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 2015), pp. 69&#x2013;71, pdf available at <a href="http://imf.org">imf.org</a>.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-133" id="ch5ft133">133</a>.</span>We do not pretend to adjudicate between the competing explanations here, but merely point to the growing consensus about a new era of lower growth: Andrew Kliman, &#x2018;What Lies Ahead: Accelerating Growth or Secular Stagnation?&#x2019; <i>E-International Relations</i>, 24 January 2014, at <a href="http://e-ir.info">e-ir.info</a>; Robert Gordon, <i>Is US Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds</i>, Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, August 2012, at <a href="http://nber.org">nber.org</a>; <a id="page_213"/>Lawrence Summers, &#x2018;US Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound&#x2019;, <i>Business Economics</i> 49: 2 (2014); Tyler Cowen, <i>The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All the Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern History, Got Sick, and Will (Eventually) Feel Better</i> (New York: Dutton, 2011); Coen Teulings and Richard Baldwin, eds, <i>Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and Cures</i> (London: CEPR, 2014).</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-134" id="ch5ft134">134</a>.</span>Cowen, <i>Great Stagnation</i>, pp. 47&#x2013;8.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-135" id="ch5ft135">135</a>.</span>Thor Berger and Carl Benedikt Frey, <i>Industrial Renewal in the 21st Century: Evidence from US Cities?</i> (Oxford Martin School Working Paper, 2014).</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-136" id="ch5ft136">136</a>.</span>Calculated based on data from: Bureau of Labor Statistics, &#x2018;Table 1. Private Sector Gross Jobs Gains and Losses by Establishment Age&#x2019;; Bureau of Labor Statistics, &#x2018;Table 5. Number of Private Sector Establishments by Age&#x2019;.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-137" id="ch5ft137">137</a>.</span>This is the position of a variety of centre-left economists. See Baker and Bernstein, <i>Getting Back to Full Employment</i>; Pavlina Tcherneva, <i>Beyond Full Employment: The Employer of Last Resort as an Institution for Change</i>, Annandale-on-Hudson: Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, September 2012, pdf available at <a href="http://levyinstitute.org">levyinstitute.org</a>.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-138" id="ch5ft138">138</a>.</span>Denning, &#x2018;Wageless Life&#x2019;, pp. 84&#x2013;6.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-139" id="ch5ft139">139</a>.</span>Aaron Bastani, &#x2018;Weaponising Workfare&#x2019;, <i>openDemocracy</i>, 22 March 2013, at <a href="http://opendemocracy.net">opendemocracy.net</a>; Joe Davidson, &#x2018;Workfare and the Management of the Consolidated Surplus Population&#x2019;, <i>Spectre</i> 1 (2013), at <a href="http://spectrecambridge.wordpress.com">spectrecambridge.wordpress.com</a>; Marta Russell, &#x2018;The New Reserve Army of Labor?&#x2019; <i>Review of Radical Political Economics</i> 33: 2 (2001).</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-140" id="ch5ft140">140</a>.</span>Aufheben, &#x2018;Editorial: The &#x201C;New&#x201D; Workfare Schemes in Historical and Class Context&#x2019;, <i>Aufheben</i> 21 (2012), pdf available at <a href="http://libcom.org">libcom.org</a>, p. 4.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-141" id="ch5ft141">141</a>.</span>&#x2018;In 1820 Britain had a population of 12 million, while between 1820 and 1915 emigration was 16 million. Put differently, more than half the increase in British population emigrated each year during this period. The total emigration from Europe as a whole to the &#x201C;new world&#x201D; (of &#x201C;temperate regions of white settlement&#x201D;) over this period was 50 million.&#x2019; Foster, McChesney and Jonna, &#x2018;The Global Reserve Army of Labor and the New Imperialism&#x2019;; Davis, <i>Planet of Slums</i>, p. 183.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-142" id="ch5ft142">142</a>.</span>For example, in the 1970s and 1980s Switzerland maintained low unemployment despite slow growth by repatriating Italian immigrants. Therborn, <i>Why Some People Are More Unemployed than Others</i>, p. 28.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-143" id="ch5ft143">143</a>.</span>Tara Brian and Frank Laczko, eds, <i>Fatal Journeys: Tracking Lives Lost During Migration</i> (Geneva: International Organization for Migration, 2014), pdf available at <a href="http://publications.iom.int">publications.iom.int</a>, p. 12.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-144" id="ch5ft144">144</a>.</span>Dennis Arnold and John Pickles, &#x2018;Global Work, Surplus Labor, and the Precarious Economies of the Border&#x2019;, <i>Antipode</i> 43: 5 (2011).</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-145" id="ch5ft145">145</a>.</span>Between 1998 and 2013, prison populations have increased from 25 to 30 per cent, while the overall world population has increased by 20 per cent. Roy Walmsley, <i>World Prison Population List</i> (London: International Centre for Prison Studies, 2013), 10th edn, pdf available at <a href="http://prisonstudies.org">prisonstudies.org</a>, p. 1.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-146" id="ch5ft146">146</a>.</span>Molly Moore, &#x2018;In France, Prisons Filled with Muslims&#x2019;, <i>Washington Post</i>, 29 April 2008; Scott Gilmore, &#x2018;Canada&#x2019;s Racism Problem? It&#x2019;s Even Worse than America&#x2019;s&#x2019;, <a id="page_214"/><i>Macleans</i>, 22 January 2015, at <a href="http://macleans.ca">macleans.ca</a>; Jaime Amparo-Alves, &#x2018;Living in the Necropolis: Homo Sacer and the Black Inhuman Condition in Sao Paulo/Brazil&#x2019;, presented at Critical Ethnic Studies and the Future of Genocide, University of California at Riverside, March 2011, at <a href="http://repositories.lib.utexas.edu">repositories.lib.utexas.edu</a>.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-147" id="ch5ft147">147</a>.</span>Alexander, <i>New Jim Crow</i>, p. 13.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-148" id="ch5ft148">148</a>.</span>George S. Rigakos and Aysegul Ergul, &#x2018;Policing the Industrial Reserve Army: An International Study&#x2019;, <i>Crime, Law and Social Change</i> 56: 4 (2011), p. 355.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-149" id="ch5ft149">149</a>.</span>Angela Y. Davis, &#x2018;Deepening the Debate over Mass Incarceration&#x2019;, <i>Socialism and Democracy</i> 28: 3 (2014), p. 16.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-150" id="ch5ft150">150</a>.</span>It suffices to point to two facts here: that the spike in prison construction came during a period of declining crime rates, and that if the crime rate is held constant over the past thirty years, the United States is six times more punitive now. Alexander, <i>New Jim Crow</i>, p. 218; Wacquant, &#x2018;Class, Race and Hyperincarceration&#x2019;, p. 45.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-151" id="ch5ft151">151</a>.</span>Wacquant, &#x2018;Class, Race and Hyperincarceration&#x2019;, p. 42.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-152" id="ch5ft152">152</a>.</span>In California, 80 per cent of defendants required representation by state-appointed lawyers. Ruth Wilson Gilmore, &#x2018;Globalisation and US Prison Growth: From Military Keynesianism to Post-Keynesian Militarism&#x2019;, <i>Race &#x0026; Class</i> 40: 2&#x2013;3 (1998&#x2013;99), p. 172.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-153" id="ch5ft153">153</a>.</span>Wacquant, &#x2018;Class, Race and Hyperincarceration&#x2019;, p. 44.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-154" id="ch5ft154">154</a>.</span>Derek Neal and Armin Rick, <i>The Prison Boom and the Lack of Black Progress After Smith and Welch</i>, Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2014, at <a href="http://nber.org">nber.org</a>, p. 2.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-155" id="ch5ft155">155</a>.</span>Wacquant, &#x2018;Class, Race and Hyperincarceration&#x2019;, p. 43.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-156" id="ch5ft156">156</a>.</span>Wacquant, &#x2018;From Slavery to Mass Incarceration: Rethinking the &#x201C;Race&#x201D; Question in America&#x2019;, <i>New Left Review</i> II/13 (January&#x2013;February 2002), p. 42.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-157" id="ch5ft157">157</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 53; Alexander, <i>New Jim Crow</i>, p. 219.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-158" id="ch5ft158">158</a>.</span>Wacquant, &#x2018;From Slavery to Mass Incarceration&#x2019;, pp. 57&#x2013;8; Rocamadur, &#x2018;The Feral Underclass Hits the Streets: On the English Riots and Other Ordeals&#x2019;, <i>Sic</i> 2 (2014), at <a href="http://communisation.net">communisation.net</a>, p. 104 n. 10.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-159" id="ch5ft159">159</a>.</span>Jeremy Travis, Bruce Western and Steve Redburn, <i>The Growth of Incarceration in the United States: Exploring Causes and Consequences</i> (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2014), p. 258; Neal and Rick, <i>Prison Boom and the Lack of Black Progress</i>, p. 34.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-160" id="ch5ft160">160</a>.</span>The mechanics of getting unions and social movements to adapt to new goals must necessarily be worked out in practice and in the context of local conditions. Union habits and structures differ from country to country and from sector to sector, making tailored responses necessary.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-161" id="ch5ft161">161</a>.</span>For example, recent fast food strikes brought forth numerous predictions that raising the minimum wage would lead to automation. Given how deplorable these jobs are, we consider their automation an unambiguous positive. Steven Greenhouse, &#x2018;$15 Wage in Fast Food Stirs Debate on Effects&#x2019;, <i>New York Times</i>, 4 December 2013.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-162" id="ch5ft162">162</a>.</span>Paul Lafargue, &#x2018;The Right to Be Lazy&#x2019;, in Bernard Marszalek, ed., <i>The Right to Be Lazy: Essays by Paul Lafargue</i> (Oakland: AK Press, 2011), p. 45.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="11_Chapter5GrigorMalogrigormalogmail5730com.xhtml#ch5ft-163" id="ch5ft163">163</a>.</span>For thoughts on how this might practically be achieved, see Angela Y. Davis, <i>Are Prisons Obsolete?</i> (New York: Seven Stories, 2003), Chapter 6.</p><p class="sub"><a id="page_215"/><b>6. POST-WORK IMAGINARIES</b></p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-1" id="ch6ft1">1</a>.</span>Both explicitly and implicitly, this chapter owes much to Kathi Weeks&#x2019;s work. See Kathi Weeks, <i>The Problem with Work: Feminism, Marxism, Antiwork Politics, and Postwork Imaginaries</i> (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-2" id="ch6ft2">2</a>.</span>&#x2018;Communiqu&#x00E9; from an Absent Future&#x2019;, <i>We Want Everything</i>, 24 September 2009, at <a href="http://wewanteverything.wordpress.com">wewanteverything.wordpress.com</a>.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-3" id="ch6ft3">3</a>.</span>Ben Trott, &#x2018;Walking in the Right Direction?&#x2019; <i>Turbulence</i> 1 (2007), at <a href="http://turbulence.org.uk">turbulence.org.uk</a>; Marco Desiriis and Jodi Dean, &#x2018;A Movement Without Demands?&#x2019; <i>Possible Futures</i>, 3 January 2012, at <a href="http://possible-futures.org">possible-futures.org</a>; Bertie Russell, &#x2018;Demanding the Future? What a Demand Can Do&#x2019;, <i>Journal of Aesthetics and Protest</i>, 2014, at <a href="http://joaap.org">joaap.org</a>.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-4" id="ch6ft4">4</a>.</span>Weeks, <i>Problem with Work</i>, pp. 218&#x2013;24, 175.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-5" id="ch6ft5">5</a>.</span>This is one aspect that distinguishes them from the concept of &#x2018;transitional demands&#x2019; articulated by Trotsky. See Trott, &#x2018;Walking in the Right Direction?&#x2019;; Leon Trotsky, <i>The Transitional Program: Death Agony of Capitalism and the Tasks of the Fourth International</i> (London: Bolshevik Publications, 1999).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-6" id="ch6ft6">6</a>.</span>On the criteria of desirability, viability and achievability, see Erik Olin Wright, <i>Envisioning Real Utopias</i> (London: Verso, 2010), pp. 20&#x2013;5.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-7" id="ch6ft7">7</a>.</span>For an example of the former, see the Stakhanovite movement, or Lenin&#x2019;s comments on Taylorist management methods: &#x2018;The Russian is a bad worker compared with people in advanced countries &#x2026; We must organise in Russia the study and teaching of the Taylor system and systematically try it out and adapt it to our own ends.&#x2019; Vladimir Lenin, &#x2018;The Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government&#x2019;, 1918, Marxists Internet Archive, at <a href="http://marxists.org">marxists.org</a>; Lewis H. Siegelbaum, <i>Stakhanovism and the Politics of Productivity in the USSR, 1935&#x2013;1941</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990). For a critique of the idea of freedom without abundance, see: &#x2018;[T]his development of productive forces &#x2026; is an absolutely necessary practical premise, because without it privation, <i>want</i>, is merely made general&#x2019;. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, <i>The German Ideology</i> (London: Prometheus, 1976), p. 54.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-8" id="ch6ft8">8</a>.</span>While we do not have the space to discuss them here, there are important ethical questions surrounding machines and work &#x2013; particularly in the area of artificial intelligence. Such issues are bound to become more significant in the coming decades. For more, see Thomas Metzinger, <i>The Ego Tunnel: The Science of the Mind and the Myth of the Self</i> (New York: Basic Books, 2009); Illah Reza Nourbakhsh, <i>Robot Futures</i> (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-9" id="ch6ft9">9</a>.</span>While ending work is a common theme of the left, the demand for full automation surprisingly finds few explicit expressions. See, for example, Eldridge Cleaver, &#x2018;On Lumpen Ideology&#x2019;, <i>The Black Scholar</i> 4: 3 (1972); Valerie Solanas, <i>S.C.U.M. Manifesto (Society for Cutting Up Men)</i> (London: Verso, 2004), p. 3; J. Jesse Ram&#x00ED;rez, &#x2018;Marcuse Among the Technocrats: America, Automation, and Postcapitalist Utopias, 1900&#x2013;1941&#x2019;, <i>American Studies</i> 57: 1 (2012). More recently, Aaron Bastani of NovaraMedia has made calls for a &#x2018;fully automated luxury communism&#x2019; and members of the Plan C collective have similarly called for &#x2018;luxury communism&#x2019; &#x2013; discussions which this book attempts to contribute to.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_216"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-10" id="ch6ft10">10</a>.</span>&#x2018;Development of the productive forces of social labour is the historical task and justification of capital. This is just the way in which it unconsciously creates the material requirements of a higher mode of production.&#x2019; Karl Marx, <i>Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume III</i> (London: Lawrence &#x0026; Wishart, 1977), p. 259.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-11" id="ch6ft11">11</a>.</span>Marilyn Fischer, &#x2018;Tensions from Technology in Marx&#x2019;s Communist Society&#x2019;, <i>Journal of Value Inquiry</i> 16: 2 (1982), pp. 125&#x2013;6; Carl Benedikt Frey and Michael Osborne, <i>The Future of Employment: How Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerisation?</i> 17 September 2013, pdf available at <a href="http://oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk">oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk</a>, p. 8; Karl Marx, <i>Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume I</i>, transl. Ben Fowkes (London: Penguin, 1990), Chapters 13&#x2013;15.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-12" id="ch6ft12">12</a>.</span>Karl Marx, <i>Grundrisse: Introduction to the Critique of Political Economy</i>, transl. Martin Nicolaus (Middlesex: Penguin, 1973), p. 693.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-13" id="ch6ft13">13</a>.</span>Marx, <i>Capital, Volume I</i>, p. 517.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-14" id="ch6ft14">14</a>.</span>Maarten Goos, <i>How the World of Work Is Changing: A Review of the Evidence</i> (Geneva: International Labour Organization, 2013), pdf available at <a href="http://ilo.org">ilo.org</a>, pp. 10&#x2013;12; Frey and Osborne, <i>Future of Employment</i>, p. 10.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-15" id="ch6ft15">15</a>.</span>Bruno Latour, &#x2018;How to Write &#x201C;The Prince&#x201D; for Machines as Well as Machinations&#x2019;, in Brian Elliot, ed., <i>Technology and Social Change</i> (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1988), p. 27.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-16" id="ch6ft16">16</a>.</span>Fiona Tregenna, <i>Manufacturing Productivity, Deindustrialization, and Reindustrialization</i>, World Institute for Development Economics Research, 2011, at <a href="http://econstor.eu">econstor.eu</a>, p. 7.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-17" id="ch6ft17">17</a>.</span>Colin Gill, <i>Work, Unemployment and the New Technology</i> (Cambridge: Polity, 1985), p. 95.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-18" id="ch6ft18">18</a>.</span>Tessa Morris-Suzuki, &#x2018;Robots and Capitalism&#x2019;, in Jim Davis, Thomas Hirschl and Michael Stack, eds, <i>Cutting Edge: Technology, Information, Capitalism and Social Revolution</i> (London: Verso, 1997), p. 15; <i>World Robotics: Industrial Robots 2014</i>, Frankfurt: International Federation of Robotics, 2014, pdf available at <a href="http://worldrobotics.org">worldrobotics.org</a>, p. 15.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-19" id="ch6ft19">19</a>.</span>Globally, 45 per cent of workers are involved in services, 32 per cent in agriculture and 23 per cent in manufacturing, with over half of recent job growth coming from the service sector. ILO, <i>Global Employment Trends 2014: Risk of a Jobless Recovery?</i> (Geneva: International Labour Organization, 2014), p. 23.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-20" id="ch6ft20">20</a>.</span>Frey and Osborne, <i>Future of Employment</i>, p. 11.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-21" id="ch6ft21">21</a>.</span>This does not include the numerous robots sold for entertainment, domestic and personal services. <i>World Robotics: Service Robots 2014</i>, Frankfurt: International Federation of Robotics, 2014, pdf available at <a href="http://worldrobotics.org">worldrobotics.org</a>, p. 20.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-22" id="ch6ft22">22</a>.</span>Routine jobs have declined from 60 per cent to 40 per cent of total jobs in the United States in this period. David Autor, Frank Levy and Richard Murnane, &#x2018;The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration&#x2019;, <i>Quarterly Journal of Economics</i> 118: 4 (2003), p. 1,296; Stefania Albanesi, Victoria Gregory, Christina Patterson and Ay<span class="font">&#x015F;</span>eg&#x00FC;l <span class="font">&#x015E;</span>ahin, &#x2018;Is Job Polarization Holding Back the Job Market?&#x2019; <i>Liberty Street Economics</i>, 27 March 2013, at <a href="http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org">libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-23" id="ch6ft23">23</a>.</span>Guido Matias Cortes, Nir Jaimovich, Christopher J. Nekarda and Henry E. Siu, <i>The</i> <a id="page_217"/><i>Micro and Macro of Disappearing Routine Jobs: A Flows Approach</i>, Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, July 2014, at <a href="http://nber.org">nber.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-24" id="ch6ft24">24</a>.</span>David Autor, <i>Polanyi&#x2019;s Paradox and the Shape of Employment Growth</i>, Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, September 2014, at <a href="http://nber.org">nber.org</a>; Maarten Goos, Alan Manning and Anna Salomons, &#x2018;Job Polarization in Europe&#x2019;, <i>American Economic Review</i> 99: 2 (2009).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-25" id="ch6ft25">25</a>.</span>Morris-Suzuki, &#x2018;Robots and Capitalism&#x2019;, p. 17.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-26" id="ch6ft26">26</a>.</span>The significance of 3D printing (or additive manufacturing) lies first in its generic capacity to create complexity with a simple technology &#x2013; anything from houses to jet engines to living organs can be created in this way. Second, its ability to drastically reduce the costs of construction (in terms of both material and labour) portend a new era in the building of basic infrastructure and housing. Finally, its flexibility is a significant advance, overcoming the traditional costs associated with revamping fixed investment for new production lines.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-27" id="ch6ft27">27</a>.</span>Businesses will easily be the quickest adopters of this technology, since it can achieve significant cost savings. Governments and public services (such as the automated overground railways already in London) are likely to be the second wave of adopters. Eventually, with legal and insurance changes, consumers will be forced into adopting this technology.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-28" id="ch6ft28">28</a>.</span>Isaac Arnsdorf, &#x2018;Rolls-Royce Drone Ships Challenge $375 Billion Industry: Freight&#x2019;, <i>Bloomberg</i>, 25 February 2014, at <a href="http://bloomberg.com">bloomberg.com</a>; BBC News, &#x2018;Amazon Testing Drones for Deliveries&#x2019;, BBC News, 2 December 2013; Danielle Kucera, &#x2018;Amazon Acquires Kiva Systems in Second-Biggest Takeover&#x2019;, <i>Bloomberg</i>, 19 March 2012, at <a href="http://bloomberg.com">bloomberg.com</a>; Vicky Validakis, &#x2018;Rio&#x2019;s Driverless Trucks Move 100 Million Tonnes&#x2019;, <i>Mining Australia</i>, 24 April 2013, at <a href="http://miningaustralia.com.au">miningaustralia.com.au</a>; Elise Hu, &#x2018;The Fast-Food Restaurants that Require Few Human Workers&#x2019;, <a href="http://NPR.org">NPR.org</a>, 29 August 2013, at <a href="http://npr.org">npr.org</a>; Christopher Steiner, <i>Automate This: How Algorithms Came to Rule Our World</i> (New York: Portfolio/Penguin, 2012); Mark Levinson, <i>The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the World Smaller and the World Economy Bigger</i> (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2008); Daniel Beunza, Donald MacKenzie, Yuval Millo and Juan Pablo Pardo-Guerra, <i>Impersonal Efficiency and the Dangers of a Fully Automated Securities Exchange</i> (London: Foresight, 2011).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-29" id="ch6ft29">29</a>.</span>For a slightly outdated but still useful summary of various automation processes, see Ramin Ramtin, <i>Capitalism and Automation: Revolution in Technology and Capitalist Breakdown</i> (London: Pluto, 1991), Chapter 4.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-30" id="ch6ft30">30</a>.</span>Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, <i>The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies</i> (New York: W. W. Norton, 2014), Chapters 2&#x2013;4.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-31" id="ch6ft31">31</a>.</span>Ibid., Chapter 1; Frey and Osborne, <i>Future of Employment</i>, p. 44.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-32" id="ch6ft32">32</a>.</span>Paul Lippe and Daniel Martin Katz, &#x2018;10 Predictions About How IBM&#x2019;s Watson Will Impact the Legal Profession&#x2019;, <i>ABA Journal</i>, 2 October 2014, at <a href="http://abajournal.com">abajournal.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-33" id="ch6ft33">33</a>.</span>Brynjolfsson and McAfee, <i>Second Machine Age</i>, Chapter 2.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-34" id="ch6ft34">34</a>.</span>Dave Cliff, Dan Brown and Philip Treleaven, <i>Technology Trends in the Financial Markets: A 2020 Vision</i> (London: Foresight, 2011), p. 36. The exact timeline of automation of financial markets depends on the product under consideration. For <a id="page_218"/>an outline of the uneven adoption of trading automation, see Carl Benedikt Frey and Michael Osborne, <i>Technology at Work: The Future of Innovation and Employment</i>, (Citi &#x2013; Global Perspectives and Solutions, 2015), pp. 26&#x2013;7, pdf available at <a href="http://ir.citi.com">ir.citi.com</a></p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-35" id="ch6ft35">35</a>.</span>Vauhini Vara, &#x2018;The Lowe&#x2019;s Robot and the Future of Service Work&#x2019;, <i>New Yorker</i>, 29 October 2014.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-36" id="ch6ft36">36</a>.</span>Frey and Osborne, <i>Future of Employment</i>, p. 19.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-37" id="ch6ft37">37</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 42.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-38" id="ch6ft38">38</a>.</span>In an unexpected revival of an old Marxist theory, two recent models have suggested that automation will lead to the immiseration of workers: Jeffrey Sachs, Seth Benzell and Guillermo LaGarda, <i>Robots: Curse or Blessing? A Basic Framework</i>, Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, April 2015, at <a href="http://nber.org">nber.org</a>; Seth Benzell, Laurence Kotlikoff, Guillermo LaGarda and Jeffrey Sachs, <i>Robots Are Us: Some Economics of Human Replacement</i>, Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2015, at <a href="http://nber.org">nber.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-39" id="ch6ft39">39</a>.</span>Lawrence Summers, &#x2018;Roundtable: The Future of Jobs&#x2019;, presented at The Future of Work in the Age of the Machine, Hamilton Project, Washington, DC, 19 February 2015, at <a href="http://hamiltonproject.org">hamiltonproject.org</a>. The ILO also argues that today&#x2019;s sluggish global job growth is related largely to sluggish economic growth, but they also note that productivity growth has recovered quicker than employment growth. ILO, <i>World Employment and Social Outlook: The Changing Nature of Jobs</i> (Geneva: International Labour Organization, 2015), pp. 19, 23.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-40" id="ch6ft40">40</a>.</span>Bank of International Settlements, <i>Annual Report, 2013/2014</i> (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, 2014), at <a href="http://bis.org">bis.org</a>, pp. 58&#x2013;60; Robert Gordon, &#x2018;US Productivity Growth: The Slowdown Has Returned After a Temporary Revival&#x2019;, <i>International Productivity Monitor</i> 25 (2013); David Autor, &#x2018;Roundtable: The Future of Jobs&#x2019;, presented at the The Future of Work in the Age of the Machine, Hamilton Project, Washington, DC, 19 February 2015, at <a href="http://hamiltonproject.org">hamiltonproject.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-41" id="ch6ft41">41</a>.</span>Susantu Basu and John Fernald, <i>Information and Communications Technology as a General-Purpose Technology: Evidence from U.S. Industry Data</i> (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper, 2006), p. 17, pdf available at <a href="http://frbsf.org">frbsf.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-42" id="ch6ft42">42</a>.</span>However, emerging research suggests industrial robots have already contributed around 16 per cent of recent labour productivity growth. Georg Graetz and Guy Michaels, <i>Robots at Work</i> (London: Centre for Economic Performance, 2015), p. 21, pdf available at <a href="http://events.crei.cat">events.crei.cat</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-43" id="ch6ft43">43</a>.</span>Frey and Osborne, <i>Technology at Work</i>, p. 40.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-44" id="ch6ft44">44</a>.</span>Frey and Osborne, <i>Future of Employment</i>, p. 38; Stuart Elliott, &#x2018;Anticipating a Luddite Revival&#x2019;, <i>Issues in Science and Technology</i> 30: 3 (2014), at <a href="http://issues.org">issues.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-45" id="ch6ft45">45</a>.</span>The standard Marxist response to full automation is to point to its &#x2018;objective&#x2019; limits by arguing that capitalism will never eliminate its source of surplus value (i.e. labour). But this argument confuses a systemic outcome with an individual incentive, an internal barrier with an absolute limit, and a political struggle with a theoretical tension. In the first place, the individual imperatives are to increase the productivity of technology in order to gain extra surplus value relative to other <a id="page_219"/>capitalists. The systemic outcome of this is detrimental for all capitalists (less surplus value being produced), but still remains beneficial for individual capitalists, and will therefore continue. In the second place, the limits of the capitalist mode of production are mistakenly taken to be the limits of any possible change. If capitalism cannot survive with full automation, it is deemed that full automation must not be possible. Such a position makes capitalism the end-point of history, rejecting in advance any postcapitalist possibility. Finally, the theoretically derived tension between increased productivity, rising organic composition and a reduced rate of profit is taken to present a situation that capital will never allow to occur because of its systemic effects. Missing from this account is a political movement that would struggle to push capitalism beyond itself. In other words, the argument that full automation will never occur simply posits that political struggle is ineffective. In the end, such a line of reasoning gives up on every critical account of capitalism, and accepts it as the final stage of history. As Ramin Ramtin bluntly puts it, &#x2018;The fact that [full automation] would result in explosive socioeconomic and political contradictions does not make it impossible&#x2019; (Ramtin, <i>Capitalism and Automation</i>, p. 103). The simple wager of the demand for full automation is that wealth can be produced in non-capitalist ways. For representative critiques of full automation, see Ernest Mandel, <i>Late Capitalism</i> (London: Verso, 1998), p. 205; George Caffentzis, &#x2018;The End of Work or the Renaissance of Slavery? A Critique of Rifkin and Negri&#x2019;, in <i>In Letters of Blood and Fire</i> (Oakland, CA: PM Press, 2012), p. 78.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-46" id="ch6ft46">46</a>.</span>It should be mentioned that, increasingly, tacit knowledge tasks are being automated through environmental control and machine learning, with more recent innovations eliminating even the need for a controlled environment. Frey and Osborne, <i>Future of Employment</i>, p. 27; Autor, <i>Polanyi&#x2019;s Paradox</i>; Sarah Yang, &#x2018;New &#x201C;Deep Learning&#x201D; Technique Enables Robot Mastery of Skills via Trial and Error&#x2019;, <i><a href="http://Phys.org">Phys.org</a></i>, 21 May 2015, at <a href="http://phys.org">phys.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-47" id="ch6ft47">47</a>.</span>As Marx notes, because of this &#x2018;the field of application for machinery would therefore be entirely different in a communist society from what it is in bourgeois society.&#x2019; Marx, <i>Capital, Volume I</i>, p. 515 n. 33.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-48" id="ch6ft48">48</a>.</span>Silvia Federici, &#x2018;Permanent Reproductive Crisis: An Interview&#x2019;, <i>Mute</i>, 7 March 2013, at <a href="http://metamute.org">metamute.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-49" id="ch6ft49">49</a>.</span>For an excellent overview of historical experiences of alternative domestic arrangements, see Dolores Hayden, <i>Grand Domestic Revolution: A History of Feminist Designs for American Homes, Neighbourhoods and Cities</i> (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1996).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-50" id="ch6ft50">50</a>.</span>However, it is important to recognise that, historically, domestic labour-saving devices have tended to place greater demands on household maintenance, rather than allowing more free time. Ruth Schwartz Cowan, <i>More Work for Mother: The Ironies of Household Technology from the Open Hearth to the Microwave</i> (New York: Basic Books, 1985); Leopoldina Fortunati, <i>The Arcane of Reproduction: Housework, Prostitution, Labor and Capital</i> (Brooklyn: Autonomedia, 1995), p. 145; Silvia Federici, &#x2018;The Reproduction of Labor Power in the Global Economy and the Unfinished Feminist Revolution&#x2019;, in <i>Revolution at Point Zero: Housework, Reproduction, and Feminist Struggle</i> (Oakland, CA: PM Press, 2012), pp. 106&#x2013;7.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_220"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-51" id="ch6ft51">51</a>.</span>We mean &#x2018;productivity&#x2019; here in the strictly Marxist sense, and not as a suggestion that domestic work is idle.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-52" id="ch6ft52">52</a>.</span>&#x2018;Robot Capable of Sorting Through and Folding Piles of Rumpled Clothes&#x2019; <i><a href="http://Phys.org">Phys.org</a></i>, 16 March 2015, at <a href="http://phys.org">phys.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-53" id="ch6ft53">53</a>.</span>Thanks to Helen Hester for emphasizing this point to us.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-54" id="ch6ft54">54</a>.</span>Shulamith Firestone, <i>The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution</i> (New York: Farrar, Straus &#x0026; Giroux, 2003), pp. 180&#x2013;1.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-55" id="ch6ft55">55</a>.</span>E. P. Thompson, &#x2018;Time, Work-Discipline, and Industrial Capitalism&#x2019;, <i>Past &#x0026; Present</i> 38: 1 (1967), p. 85; Stanley Aronowitz, Dawn Esposito, William DiFazio and Margaret Yard, &#x2018;The Post-Work Manifesto&#x2019;, in Stanley Aronowitz and Jonathan Cutler, eds, <i>Post-Work: The Wages of Cybernation</i> (New York: Routledge, 1998), pp. 59&#x2013;60; David Graeber, &#x2018;Revolution at the Level of Common Sense&#x2019;, in Federico Campagna and Emanuele Campiglio, eds, <i>What We Are Fighting For: A Radical Collective Manifesto</i> (London: Pluto, 2012), p. 171.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-56" id="ch6ft56">56</a>.</span>Benjamin Kline Hunnicutt, <i>Work Without End: Abandoning Shorter Hours for the Right to Work</i> (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1988), p. 9.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-57" id="ch6ft57">57</a>.</span>Roland Paulsen, &#x2018;Non-Work at Work: Resistance or What?&#x2019;, <i>Organization</i>, 2013, at <a href="http://sagepub.com">sagepub.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-58" id="ch6ft58">58</a>.</span>Witold Rybczynski, <i>Waiting for the Weekend</i> (New York: Penguin, 1991), pp. 115&#x2013;17; Thompson, &#x2018;Time, Work-Discipline, and Industrial Capitalism&#x2019;, p. 76.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-59" id="ch6ft59">59</a>.</span>Rybczynski, <i>Waiting for the Weekend</i>, p. 133.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-60" id="ch6ft60">60</a>.</span>Hunnicutt, <i>Work Without End</i>, p. 1.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-61" id="ch6ft61">61</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 155.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-62" id="ch6ft62">62</a>.</span>Ibid., pp. 147&#x2013;9.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-63" id="ch6ft63">63</a>.</span>Paul Lafargue, &#x2018;The Right to Be Lazy&#x2019;, in Bernard Marszalek, ed., <i>The Right to Be Lazy: Essays by Paul Lafargue</i> (Oakland: AK Press, 2011), p. 34.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-64" id="ch6ft64">64</a>.</span>John Maynard Keynes, &#x2018;Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren&#x2019;, in <i>Essays in Persuasion</i> (New York: W. W. Norton, 1963); Hunnicutt, <i>Work Without End</i>, p. 155.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-65" id="ch6ft65">65</a>.</span>Marx, <i>Capital, Volume III</i>, p. 820.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-66" id="ch6ft66">66</a>.</span>Hunnicutt, <i>Work Without End</i>, Chapter 7.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-67" id="ch6ft67">67</a>.</span>A handful of EU countries &#x2013; most notably France &#x2013; have reduced the working week to as little as thirty-five hours, but the overall trend has been to maintain a forty-hour working week. The 1970s also saw some sectors strike explicitly in support of a shorter working week. Ibid., p. 198; Anders Hayden, &#x2018;Patterns and Purpose of Work-Time Reduction: A Cross-National Comparison&#x2019;, in Anna Coote and Jane Franklin, eds, <i>Time on Our Side: Why We All Need a Shorter Working Week</i> (London: New Economics Foundation, 2013), p. 128; Aronowitz et al., &#x2018;Post-Work Manifesto&#x2019;, p. 63; Chris Harman, <i>Is a Machine After Your Job? New Technology and the Struggle for Socialism</i> (London, 1979), at <a href="http://marxists.org">marxists.org</a>, Part 8.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-68" id="ch6ft68">68</a>.</span>Hunnicutt, <i>Work Without End</i>, p. 2.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-69" id="ch6ft69">69</a>.</span>Notably, this appears to have reached a turning point in the US. Despite the addition of 40 million new workers, overall labour hours remained the same between 1998 and 2013. Shawn Sprague, &#x2018;What Can Labor Productivity Tell Us About the U.S. Economy?&#x2019;, <i>Beyond the Numbers: Productivity</i> 3: 12 (2014), p. 1.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_221"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-70" id="ch6ft70">70</a>.</span>Jonathan Crary, <i>24/7: Terminal Capitalism and the Ends of Sleep</i> (London: Verso, 2013).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-71" id="ch6ft71">71</a>.</span>Lydia Saad, &#x2018;The &#x201C;40-Hour&#x201D; Workweek Is Actually Longer &#x2013; by Seven Hours&#x2019;, <i>Gallup</i>, 29 August 2014, at <a href="http://gallup.com">gallup.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-72" id="ch6ft72">72</a>.</span>Valerie Bryson, &#x2018;Time, Care and Gender Inequalities&#x2019;, in Coote and Franklin, <i>Time on Our Side</i>, p. 56.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-73" id="ch6ft73">73</a>.</span>Craig Lambert, &#x2018;The Second Job You Don&#x2019;t Know You Have&#x2019;, <i>Politico</i>, 20 May 2015, at <a href="http://politico.eu">politico.eu</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-74" id="ch6ft74">74</a>.</span>Guy Standing, <i>The Precariat: The New Dangerous Class</i> (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2011), pp. 120&#x2013;7.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-75" id="ch6ft75">75</a>.</span>The manifold arguments for shorter working weeks have been repeated throughout history: the physical and mental health benefits, the response to technological unemployment, the improved productivity it could bring about, and the better bargaining position it would generate for labour. These arguments were as dominant in the early twentieth century as they are now.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-76" id="ch6ft76">76</a>.</span>David Rosnick and Mark Weisbrot, <i>Are Shorter Work Hours Good for the Environment? A Comparison of US and European Energy Consumption</i>, Center for Economic and Policy Research, December 2006, pdf available at <a href="http://cepr.net">cepr.net</a>, p. 7; Anders Hayden and John M. Shandra, &#x2018;Hours of Work and the Ecological Footprint of Nations: An Exploratory Analysis&#x2019;, <i>Local Environment</i> 14: 6 (2009).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-77" id="ch6ft77">77</a>.</span>Juliet Schor, &#x2018;The Triple Dividend&#x2019;, in Coote and Franklin, <i>Time on Our Side</i>, pp. 9&#x2013;10.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-78" id="ch6ft78">78</a>.</span>Denis Campbell, &#x2018;UK Needs Four-Day Week to Combat Stress, Says Top Doctor&#x2019;, <i>Guardian</i>, 1 July 2014.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-79" id="ch6ft79">79</a>.</span>Ibid., pp. 20&#x2013;1.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-80" id="ch6ft80">80</a>.</span>Mondli Hlatshwayo, &#x2018;NUMSA and Solidarity&#x2019;s Responses to Technological Changes at the ArcelorMittal Vanderbijlpark Plant: Unions Caught on the Back Foot&#x2019;, <i>Global Labour Journal</i> 5: 3 (2014); Ramtin, <i>Capitalism and Automation</i>, p. 132.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-81" id="ch6ft81">81</a>.</span>This was a position floated by the TUC in the UK during the 1970s, and which achieved some success with metalworkers in West Germany. Gill, <i>Work, Unemployment and the New Technology</i>, pp. 171&#x2013;2.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-82" id="ch6ft82">82</a>.</span>This was what occurred in the 1996 French truck drivers&#x2019; strike. Alan Riding, &#x2018;French Trucker Strike Ends with Indirect Defeat for Government&#x2019;, <i>New York Times</i>, 30 November 1996.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-83" id="ch6ft83">83</a>.</span>Andr&#x00E9; Gorz, <i>Paths to Paradise: On the Liberation from Work</i>, transl. Malcolm Imrie (Boston: South End Press, 1985), p. 46.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-84" id="ch6ft84">84</a>.</span>Anna Coote, Jane Franklin and Andrew Simms, <i>21 Hours</i> (London: New Economics Foundation, 2010), at <a href="http://neweconomics.org">neweconomics.org</a>; Tom Hodgkinson, &#x2018;Campaigners Call for 30-Hour Working Week to Allow for Healthier, Fairer Society &#x2013; and More Time for Fun&#x2019;, <i>Independent</i>, 24 April 2014.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-85" id="ch6ft85">85</a>.</span>Jo Littler, Nina Power and Precarious Workers Brigade, &#x2018;Life After Work&#x2019;, <i>New Left Project</i>, 20 May 2014, at <a href="http://newleftproject.org">newleftproject.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-86" id="ch6ft86">86</a>.</span>Will Dahlgreen, &#x2018;Introduce a Four Day Week, Say Public&#x2019;, <i>YouGov</i>, 16 April 2014, at <a href="http://yougov.co.uk">yougov.co.uk</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-87" id="ch6ft87">87</a>.</span>Schor, &#x2018;Triple Dividend&#x2019;, p. 8.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_222"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-88" id="ch6ft88">88</a>.</span>Anna Coote, &#x2018;Introduction: A New Economics of Work and Time&#x2019;, in Coote and Franklin, <i>Time on Our Side</i>, p. xxi; Hayden, &#x2018;Patterns and Purpose of Work-Time Reduction&#x2019;.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-89" id="ch6ft89">89</a>.</span>The above subheading is from Sleaford Mods&#x2019; song of the same name.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-90" id="ch6ft90">90</a>.</span>Paul Mattick, &#x2018;The Economics of Cybernation&#x2019;, <i>New Politics</i> 1: 4 (1962), p. 30.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-91" id="ch6ft91">91</a>.</span>The idea has also been called a guaranteed income, a social dividend, a citizen&#x2019;s income and a negative income tax. Each of these invokes a slightly different variation. We prefer the term &#x2018;universal basic income&#x2019; because it does not immediately limit who can receive the income (as does the idea of a &#x2018;citizen&#x2019;s income&#x2019;), and it does not rely on an income ceiling (as does a &#x2018;negative income tax&#x2019;).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-92" id="ch6ft92">92</a>.</span>UBI has been advocated by numerous thinkers. See, among many other sources, Thomas Paine, &#x2018;Agrarian Justice&#x2019;, in <i>Rights of Man, Common Sense, and Other Political Writings</i>, ed. Mark Philp (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008); Bertrand Russell, <i>Roads to Freedom: Socialism, Anarchism and Syndicalism</i> (Nottingham: Spokesman, 2006); Robert Theobald, ed., <i>The Guaranteed Income: Next Step in Economic Evolution?</i> (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1966); Martin Luther King, <i>Where Do We Go from Here? Chaos or Community?</i> (Boston, MA: Beacon, 2010); Milton Friedman, <i>Capitalism and Freedom: Fortieth Anniversary Edition</i> (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002); Murray Bookchin, <i>Post-Scarcity Anarchism</i> (Edinburgh: AK Press, 2004); Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, <i>Empire</i> (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001); Weeks, <i>Problem with Work</i>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-93" id="ch6ft93">93</a>.</span>Walter Van Trier, &#x2018;Who Framed &#x201C;Social Dividend&#x201D;?&#x2019;, presented at the First USBIG Conference, CUNY, New York, 8 March 2002, at <a href="http://econpapers.repec.org">econpapers.repec.org</a>, p. 29.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-94" id="ch6ft94">94</a>.</span>Lynn Chancer, &#x2018;Benefitting from Pragmatic Vision, Part I: The Case for Guaranteed Income in Principle&#x2019;, in Aronowitz and Cutler, <i>Post-Work</i>, p. 86.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-95" id="ch6ft95">95</a>.</span>Evelyn Forget, <i>The Town with No Poverty: Using Health Administration Data to Revisit Outcomes of a Canadian Guaranteed Annual Income Field Experiment</i> (Winnipeg: University of Manitoba, 2011); Derek Hum and Wayne Simpson, &#x2018;A Guaranteed Annual Income? From Mincome to the Millennium&#x2019;, <i>Policy Options/Options Politique</i>, February 2001.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-96" id="ch6ft96">96</a>.</span>Chancer, &#x2018;Benefitting from Pragmatic Vision, Part I&#x2019;, p. 86.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-97" id="ch6ft97">97</a>.</span>Specifically, in the United States these included Nixon&#x2019;s Family Assistance Plan and Carter&#x2019;s Better Jobs and Income Program, neither of which was passed. In Australia, a guaranteed income was also recommended by the Poverty Commission in 1973, but support for it evaporated after elections brought in a new government. Ibid., pp. 87&#x2013;9; Barry Jones, <i>Sleepers Wake! Technology and The Future of Work</i> (London: Oxford University Press, 1982), pp. 204&#x2013;5.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-98" id="ch6ft98">98</a>.</span>An indispensable resource for the story behind this rise and fall in a basic income policy, along with an essential guide to how cultural framing affects the viability of the policy, is Brian Steensland, <i>The Failed Welfare Revolution: America&#x2019;s Struggle over Guaranteed Income Policy</i> (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-99" id="ch6ft99">99</a>.</span>Daniel Ravent&#x00F3;s, <i>Basic Income: The Material Conditions of Freedom</i>, transl. Julie Wark (London: Pluto Press, 2007), p. 12.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-100" id="ch6ft100">100</a>.</span>Paul Krugman, &#x2018;Sympathy for the Luddites&#x2019;, <i>New York Times</i>, 13 June 2013; Martin Wolf, &#x2018;Enslave the Robots and Free the Poor&#x2019;, <i>Financial Times</i>, 11 February 2014.</p><p class="note"><a id="page_223"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-101" id="ch6ft101">101</a>.</span>More specifically, the Green Party of England and Wales has included it in its manifesto; the Liberal Party of Canada has put the idea on their agenda, and its leader pushed for it in 2001; in Canada, the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs recommended it as a way to deal with poverty; and the Swiss will be voting in a referendum on the idea. Denis Balibouse, &#x2018;Swiss to Vote on 2,500 Franc Basic Income for Every Adult&#x2019;, <i>Reuters</i>, 4 October 2013; Hum and Simpson, &#x2018;A Guaranteed Annual Income?&#x2019;; Rigmar Osterkamp, &#x2018;The Basic Income Grant Pilot Project in Namibia: A Critical Assessment&#x2019;, <i>Basic Income Studies</i> 8: 1 (2013); Davala et al., <i>Basic Income</i>; Forget, <i>The Town with No Poverty</i>, p. 2.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-102" id="ch6ft102">102</a>.</span>Davala et al., <i>Basic Income</i>; Barbara Jacobson, &#x2018;Basic Income Is a Human Right! A Report on the Demonstration in Berlin&#x2019;, <i>Basic Income UK</i>, 29 September 2013, at <a href="http://basicincome.org.uk">basicincome.org.uk</a>; Alfredo Mazzamauro, &#x2018;&#x201C;Only One Big Project&#x201D;: Italy&#x2019;s Burgeoning Social Movements&#x2019;, <i>ROAR Magazine</i>, 20 January 2014. The Basic Income Earth Network (BIEN), which has been campaigning for a UBI since 1986.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-103" id="ch6ft103">103</a>.</span>This is a design choice, however &#x2013; as the conservative proposal for a UBI (or the functionally similar negative income tax) often invokes means-testing. See, for example, Lewis Meriam, <i>Relief and Social Security</i> (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1946); Friedman, <i>Capitalism and Freedom</i>.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-104" id="ch6ft104">104</a>.</span>A UBI programme would ideally involve a transformation of the welfare state. Programmes that provide services must be kept and expanded &#x2013; for example, healthcare, childcare, housing, public transport and internet access. All of these should be immediate goals of the left, not only for their inherent good but also because expanding public services is necessary for reducing overall energy consumption. Alyssa Battistoni, &#x2018;Alive in the Sunshine&#x2019;, <i>Jacobin</i> 13 (2014), at <a href="http://jacobinmag.com">jacobinmag.com</a>; Wright, <i>Envisioning Real Utopias</i>, p. 4.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-105" id="ch6ft105">105</a>.</span>Forget, <i>The Town with No Poverty</i>; Hum and Simpson, &#x2018;A Guaranteed Annual Income?&#x2019;; Chancer, &#x2018;Benefitting from Pragmatic Vision, Part I&#x2019;, pp. 99&#x2013;109.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-106" id="ch6ft106">106</a>.</span>The rise of UBI in the 1960s and 1970s was largely a result of this capacity to generate support across political divisions. Steensland, <i>Failed Welfare Revolution</i>, pp. 18&#x2013;19.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-107" id="ch6ft107">107</a>.</span>Wright, <i>Envisioning Real Utopias</i>, p. 218.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-108" id="ch6ft108">108</a>.</span>Cutler and Aronowitz, &#x2018;Quitting Time&#x2019;, p. 8.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-109" id="ch6ft109">109</a>.</span>Micha&#x0142; Kalecki, &#x2018;Political Aspects of Full Employment&#x2019;, <i>Political Quarterly</i> 14: 4 (1943).</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-110" id="ch6ft110">110</a>.</span>The influential Holmes and Rahe Stress Scale found the loss of a job to be one of the most stressful life events an adult can face. Richard H. Rahe and Ransom J. Arthur, &#x2018;Life Change and Illness Studies: Past History and Future Directions&#x2019;, <i>Journal of Human Stress</i> 4: 1 (1978).</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-111" id="ch6ft111">111</a>.</span>A basic income has been a centrepiece proposal of the Japanese Blue Grass Collective, a group of disability activists who have been mobilizing for the idea since the 1970s. Toru Yamamori, &#x2018;Una Sola Moltitudine: Struggles for Basic Income and the Common Logic that Emerged from Italy, the UK, and Japan&#x2019;, presented at Immaterial Labour, Multitudes and New Social Subjects, King&#x2019;s College, University of Cambridge, 29 April 2006, pp. 9&#x2013;12, pdf available at <a href="http://academia.edu">academia.edu</a>.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-112" id="ch6ft112">112</a>.</span>Paolo Virno, <i>A Grammar of the Multitude</i> (Cambridge: Semiotext(e), 2004), pp. 98&#x2013;9.</p><p class="note"><a id="page_224"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-113" id="ch6ft113">113</a>.</span>Marx and Engels, <i>German Ideology</i>, p. 53.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-114" id="ch6ft114">114</a>.</span>Robert J. Van Der Veen and Philippe Van Parijs, &#x2018;A Capitalist Road to Communism&#x2019;, <i>Theory and Society</i> 15: 5 (1986), pp. 645&#x2013;6.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-115" id="ch6ft115">115</a>.</span>Weeks, <i>Problem with Work</i>, p. 230.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-116" id="ch6ft116">116</a>.</span>Ailsa Mckay and Jo Vanevery, &#x2018;Gender, Family, and Income Maintenance: A Feminist Case for Citizens Basic Income&#x2019;, <i>Social Politics: International Studies in Gender, State and Society</i> 7: 2 (2000), p. 281; Gorz, <i>Paths to Paradise</i>, p. 42.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-117" id="ch6ft117">117</a>.</span>Notably, this also fundamentally distinguishes the position here from a number of other proposals (such as Parecon or New Socialism) which explicitly identify effort and sacrifice as the bases for reward. Michael Albert, <i>Parecon: Life After Capitalism</i> (London: Verso, 2004), p. 157; W. Paul Cockshott and Allin Cottrell, <i>Towards a New Socialism</i> (Nottingham: Spokesman, 1993), p. 27; Karl Marx, <i>Critique of the Gotha Program</i> (New York: International, 1966), pp. 8&#x2013;10.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-118" id="ch6ft118">118</a>.</span>Weeks, <i>Problem with Work</i>, p. 149.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-119" id="ch6ft119">119</a>.</span>Mckay and Vanevery, &#x2018;Gender, Family, and Income Maintenance&#x2019;, p. 280.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-120" id="ch6ft120">120</a>.</span>Hum and Simpson, &#x2018;A Guaranteed Annual Income?&#x2019;, p. 81.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-121" id="ch6ft121">121</a>.</span>This is one reason why the UBI is a better demand than that of wages for housework. Weeks, <i>Problem with Work</i>, p. 144.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-122" id="ch6ft122">122</a>.</span>Ravent&#x00F3;s, <i>Basic Income</i>, Chapter 8; Chancer, &#x2018;Benefitting from Pragmatic Vision, Part I&#x2019;, pp. 120&#x2013;2; Guy Standing, &#x2018;The Precariat Needs a Basic Income&#x2019; <i>Financial Times</i>, 21 November 2013; Gorz, <i>Paths to Paradise</i>, p. 45.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-123" id="ch6ft123">123</a>.</span>For an eloquent polemic against the work ethic, see Federico Campagna, <i>The Last Night: Anti-Work, Atheism, Adventure</i> (Winchester: Zero, 2013).</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-124" id="ch6ft124">124</a>.</span>Steensland, <i>Failed Welfare Revolution</i>, pp. 13&#x2013;18.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-125" id="ch6ft125">125</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 17.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-126" id="ch6ft126">126</a>.</span>Pierre Dardot and Christian Laval, <i>The New Way of the World: On Neoliberal Society</i>, transl. Gregory Elliot (London: Verso, 2014), p. 260.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-127" id="ch6ft127">127</a>.</span>Campagna, <i>Last Night</i>, p. 16.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-128" id="ch6ft128">128</a>.</span>Weeks, <i>Problem with Work</i>, p. 44.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-129" id="ch6ft129">129</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 46.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-130" id="ch6ft130">130</a>.</span>Ibid., pp. 70&#x2013;1.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-131" id="ch6ft131">131</a>.</span>Youngjoo Cha and Kim A. Weeden, &#x2018;Overwork and the Slow Convergence in the Gender Gap in Wages&#x2019;, <i>American Sociological Review</i> 79: 3 (2014).</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-132" id="ch6ft132">132</a>.</span>Keir Milburn, &#x2018;On Social Strikes and Directional Demands&#x2019;, <i>Plan C</i>, 7 May 2015, at <a href="http://weareplanc.org">weareplanc.org</a>.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-133" id="ch6ft133">133</a>.</span><i>State of the Global Workplace: Employee Engagement Insights for Business Leaders Worldwide</i>, Gallup, 2013, pdf available at <a href="http://ihrim.org">ihrim.org</a>, p. 12.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-134" id="ch6ft134">134</a>.</span>As usual, the satirical newspaper <i>The Onion</i> is ahead of the curve, with a recent headline declaring: &#x2018;Chinese Factory Workers Fear They May Never Be Replaced with Machines&#x2019;.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-135" id="ch6ft135">135</a>.</span>G&#x00E1;sp&#x00E1;r Mikl&#x00F3;s Tam&#x00E1;s, &#x2018;Telling the Truth About Class&#x2019;, <i>Grundrisse</i> 22 (2007), at <a href="http://grundrisse.net">grundrisse.net</a>.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-136" id="ch6ft136">136</a>.</span>While it adhered to unscalable folk-political practices, the &#x2018;back to the land&#x2019; movement of the 1970s was in many ways an expression of the desire to escape the dominant work ethic. Bernard Marszalek, &#x2018;Lafargue for Today&#x2019;, in <i>The Right to Be Lazy</i>, p. 13.</p><p class="note"><a id="page_225"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-137" id="ch6ft137">137</a>.</span>Gorz, <i>Paths to Paradise</i>, p. 10.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="12_Chapter6GrigorMalogr1312igormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch6ft-138" id="ch6ft138">138</a>.</span>Steensland, <i>Failed Welfare Revolution</i> p. 220.</p><p class="sub"><b>7. A NEW COMMON SENSE</b></p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-1" id="ch7ft1">1</a>.</span>Lesley Wood, <i>Crisis and Control: The Militarization of Protest Policing</i> (London: Pluto, 2014).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-2" id="ch7ft2">2</a>.</span>For an overview of some of the debates around capitalism&#x2019;s origins, see Ellen Meiksins Wood, <i>The Origin of Capitalism: A Longer View</i> (London: Verso, 2002), Chapters 1&#x2013;3.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-3" id="ch7ft3">3</a>.</span>For a foundational step towards understanding the conditions of postcolonial capitalism and the hegemony of &#x2018;development&#x2019;, see Kalyan Sanyal, <i>Rethinking Capitalist Development: Primitive Accumulation, Governmentality and Post-Colonial Capitalism</i> (New Delhi: Routledge India, 2013).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-4" id="ch7ft4">4</a>.</span>The unique conditions of Venezuela appear to have produced the only space in which this strategy is being meaningfully adopted, albeit in an intriguingly modified form. See George Ciccariello-Maher, &#x2018;Dual Power in the Venezuelan Revolution&#x2019;, <i>Monthly Review</i> 59: 4 (2007); Vladimir Lenin, &#x2018;The Dual Power&#x2019;, <i>Pravda</i>, 9 April 1917, at <a href="http://marxists.org">marxists.org</a>.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-5" id="ch7ft5">5</a>.</span>For a critique of communisation&#x2019;s tendency to make this supposition, see Alberto Toscano, &#x2018;Now and Never&#x2019;, in Benjamin Noys, ed., <i>Communization and Its Discontents: Contestation, Critique, and Contemporary Struggles</i> (Brooklyn: Minor Compositions, 2012).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-6" id="ch7ft6">6</a>.</span>While agreeing with their counter-hegemonic approach and insistence on a postcapitalist vision, we diverge from J. K. Gibson-Graham&#x2019;s goal of folk-political community economies and their discursive understanding of hegemony. The major difference in analysis is in their denial of capitalist universalism, which enables them to see small-scale particularities as sufficient for changing economies. For the critique of capitalist universalism and the articulation of a postcapitalist hegemony, see, respectively, J. K. Gibson-Graham, <i>The End of Capitalism (as We Knew It): A Feminist Critique of Political Economy</i> (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2006); and J. K. Gibson-Graham, <i>A Postcapitalist Politics</i> (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2006).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-7" id="ch7ft7">7</a>.</span>The full story of the evolution of the term within Marxist thought begins with its inclusion in the writings of G. V. Plekhanov in 1884 as <i>gegemoniya</i>, which by the time of Lenin had evolved into an idea of political leadership within a class alliance. This idea was developed considerably by Gramsci into a more ramified and complex understanding of rule by consent, to analyse both Marxist strategy and the existing state of capitalist power. G. F. Plekhanov, &#x2018;Socialism and the Political Struggle&#x2019;, in <i>Selected Philosophical Works</i>, vol. 1 (Moscow: Progress, 1974); V. I. Lenin, <i>What Is to Be Done?</i> (Moscow: Progress, 1971); Antonio Gramsci, <i>Selections from the Prison Notebooks</i>, ed. Quintin Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell-Smith (London: Lawrence &#x0026; Wishart, 1971).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-8" id="ch7ft8">8</a>.</span>There have been a number of critiques of hegemony, including Richard Day, <i>Gramsci Is Dead: Anarchist Currents in the Newest Social Movements</i> (London: Pluto, 2005); Scott Lash, &#x2018;Power After Hegemony: Cultural Studies in Mutation?&#x2019; <a id="page_226"/><i>Theory, Culture &#x0026; Society</i> 24: 3 (2007); Athina Karatzogianni and Andrew Robinson, <i>Power, Resistance, and Conflict in the Contemporary World: Social Movements, Networks, and Hierarchies</i> (London/New York: Routledge, 2010); Jon Beasley-Murray, <i>Posthegemony: Political Theory and Latin America</i> (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010). It suffices to say that the majority of these critiques rest upon a misconstruction of hegemony, either as being equivalent to domination (which in all its post-Gramscian formulations it is explicitly not) or as relying upon active assent (which it does not). While other theoretical understandings of power &#x2013; such as those offered by thinkers like Foucault, Deleuze and Guattari, and Bourdieu &#x2013; might be usefully applied as supplements to the perspective offered by the idea of hegemony, we do not agree with those who have recently argued that they can effectively replace it.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-9" id="ch7ft9">9</a>.</span>It is useful to note here that, while hegemonic governance is generally within the order of (at least passive) consent, it does not mean the total absence of dominance or coercive force. It indicates simply a situation in which coercive force must be cloaked in the respectable garb of consensuality. See Gramsci, <i>Selections from the Prison Notebooks</i>, p. 80. This clarification is necessary to avoid charges of the kind levelled against Gramscian hegemony theory by critics who want to attest to the historical&#x2013;cultural specificity of the idea, especially given its apparent incompatibility with very different political situations such as those of India under British colonialism, or the United States during slavery. See Ranajit Guha, <i>Dominance Without Hegemony: History and Power in Colonial India</i> (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998); Frank Wilderson, &#x2018;Gramsci&#x2019;s Black Marx: Whither the Slave in Civil Society?&#x2019; <i>Social Identities</i> 9: 2 (2003). We will presume that hegemony in the generalised sense we outline in this chapter will pertain in any complex society where domination is <i>not</i> the primary mode of governance.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-10" id="ch7ft10">10</a>.</span>This is a point also made by Podemos leader Pablo Iglesias. Pablo Iglesias, &#x2018;The Left Can Win&#x2019;, <i>Jacobin</i>, 9 December 2014, at <a href="http://jacobinmag.com">jacobinmag.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-11" id="ch7ft11">11</a>.</span>John Holloway, <i>Change the World Without Taking Power: The Meaning of Revolution Today</i> (London: Pluto Press, 2010).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-12" id="ch7ft12">12</a>.</span>While Gramscianism has often been associated with the Eurocommunist political tendency, we would distinguish the basic political analysis and strategic insights of hegemony theory from this particular historical manifestation. Indeed, an overt focus on electoralism in preference to achieving broader hegemonic transformations would seem to us to be an abandonment of the fundamental insights of hegemony itself &#x2013; not the least of which is an understanding of power as resting in multiple interlocking loci, of which the state is only one.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-13" id="ch7ft13">13</a>.</span>While we endorse the expansion of the concept of hegemony contained in the work of Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe, in particular its expansion of the range of political subjectivities included within it, it is not without problems. The use of discourse theory as a social ontology results in an effectively anti-realist account, which does unnecessary harm to the broader project of understanding the complexity of the political world. See Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe, <i>Hegemony and Socialist Strategy</i> (London/New York: Verso, 1985); Ernesto Laclau, <i>New Reflections on the Revolution of Our Time</i> (London/New York: Verso, 1990). For a lengthy <a id="page_227"/>critique of Laclau and Mouffe&#x2019;s discourse-based hegemony theory, see Geoff Boucher, <i>The Charmed Circle of Ideology: A Critique of Laclau and Mouffe, Butler and &#x017D;i&#x017E;ek</i> (Melbourne: re.press, 2009).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-14" id="ch7ft14">14</a>.</span>David Harvey, <i>A Brief History of Neoliberalism</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), p. 40.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-15" id="ch7ft15">15</a>.</span>This concept was originally devised by Joseph Overton, in relation to the proper operational purpose of a think tank. See Nathan J. Russell, &#x2018;An Introduction to the Overton Window of Political Possibilities&#x2019;, Mackinac Center for Public Policy, 4 January 2006, at <a href="http://mackinac.org">mackinac.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-16" id="ch7ft16">16</a>.</span>This can be conceived in cultural terms as the creation of &#x2018;capitalist realism&#x2019;. See Mark Fisher, <i>Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative?</i> (Winchester: Zero, 2009).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-17" id="ch7ft17">17</a>.</span>&#x2018;In such a situation, hegemony has nothing to do with the capacity to make people believe in you; it has everything to do with the strategic capacity to render their belief or disbelief irrelevant.&#x2019; Jeremy Gilbert, &#x2018;Hegemony Now&#x2019;, 2013, at <a href="http://academia.edu">academia.edu</a>, p. 16.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-18" id="ch7ft18">18</a>.</span>David Harvey, <i>Spaces of Hope</i> (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2000), p. 159.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-19" id="ch7ft19">19</a>.</span>Judy Wajcman, <i>TechnoFeminism</i> (Cambridge: Polity, 2004), p. 35.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-20" id="ch7ft20">20</a>.</span>Jonathan Joseph, <i>Hegemony: A Realist Analysis</i> (New York: Routledge, 2002).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-21" id="ch7ft21">21</a>.</span>Thomas Hughes, &#x2018;Technological Momentum&#x2019;, in Merritt Roe Smith and Leo Marx, eds, <i>Does Technology Drive History? The Dilemma of Technological Determinism</i> (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994); and <i>Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880&#x2013;1930</i> (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-22" id="ch7ft22">22</a>.</span>This is what Peter Thomas argues: &#x2018;Gramsci &#x2026; was aware that all social practices are interrelated, precisely because of his Marxist emphasis on social practices as social relations within a social totality, not merely as the expressions of some regional logics. That led him to conceive of what I would describe as the &#x201C;political constitution of the social&#x201D;.&#x2019; Peter Thomas, &#x2018;&#x201C;The Gramscian Moment&#x201D;: An Interview with Peter Thomas&#x2019;, in Adam Thomas, ed., <i>Antonio Gramsci: Working-Class Revolutionary: Essays and Interviews</i> (London: Workers&#x2019; Liberty, 2012).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-23" id="ch7ft23">23</a>.</span>De Witt Douglas Kilgore, <i>Astrofuturism: Science, Race, and Visions of Utopia in Space</i> (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2003), p. 21.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-24" id="ch7ft24">24</a>.</span>Asif A. Siddiqi, <i>The Red Rockets&#x2019; Glare: Spaceflight and the Russian Imagination, 1857&#x2013;1957</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014), p. 78.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-25" id="ch7ft25">25</a>.</span>Nikolai Federovich Federov, &#x2018;The Philosophy of the Common Task&#x2019;, in <i>What Was Man Created For?</i>, transl. Elisabeth Kouitaissof and Marilyn Minto (London: Honeyglen, 1990), p. 98.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-26" id="ch7ft26">26</a>.</span>For one example, see Alexander Bogdanov, <i>Red Star: The First Bolshevik Utopia</i>, ed. Loren Graham and Richard Stites, transl. Charles Rougle (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1984).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-27" id="ch7ft27">27</a>.</span>Siddiqi, <i>Red Rockets&#x2019; Glare</i>, pp. 86&#x2013;7.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-28" id="ch7ft28">28</a>.</span>Richard Stites, <i>Revolutionary Dreams: Utopian Vision and Experimental Life in the Russian Revolution</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989), p. 36.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-29" id="ch7ft29">29</a>.</span>Francis Spufford, <i>Red Plenty: Inside the Fifties&#x2019; Soviet Dream</i> (London: Faber &#x0026; Faber, 2010); Siddiqi, <i>Red Rockets&#x2019; Glare</i>, Chapter 8.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_228"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-30" id="ch7ft30">30</a>.</span>While the Soviet Union is now often deemed an economic failure, between 1928 and 1970 its economy did exceptionally well, outpacing every country except Japan. Robert Allen, <i>Farm to Factory: A Reinterpretation of the Soviet Industrial Economy</i> (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003), pp. 6&#x2013;7.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-31" id="ch7ft31">31</a>.</span>Steve Fraser, <i>The Age of Acquiescence: The Life and Death of American Resistance to Organized Wealth and Power</i> (New York: Little, Brown US, 2015), Chapter 6.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-32" id="ch7ft32">32</a>.</span>Fisher, <i>Capitalist Realism</i>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-33" id="ch7ft33">33</a>.</span>The shift from the secular, postcapitalist techno-optimism of <i>Star Trek</i> to the fundamentalist techno-pessimism of <i>Battlestar Galactica</i> is one example of this. Barry Buzan, &#x2018;America in Space: The International Relations of <i>Star Trek</i> and <i>Battlestar Galactica</i>&#x2019;, <i>Millennium: Journal of International Studies</i> 39: 1 (2010).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-34" id="ch7ft34">34</a>.</span>See, for example, Kathi Weeks, <i>The Problem with Work: Feminism, Marxism, Antiwork Politics, and Postwork Imaginaries</i> (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011), pp. 182&#x2013;3; Nancy Fraser, <i>The Fortunes of Feminism: From Women&#x2019;s Liberation to Identity Politics to Anti-Capitalism</i> (London: Verso, 2013); Helen Hester, &#x2018;Promethean Labours and Domestic Realism&#x2019;, in Joshua Johnson, ed., <i>The Scales of Our Eyes: The Scope of Leftist Thought</i> (London: Mimesis International, 2015); Jos&#x00E9; Esteban Mu&#x00F1;oz, <i>Cruising Utopia: The Then and There of Queer Futurity</i> (New York: New York University Press, 2009), pp. 19&#x2013;21; Shulamith Firestone, <i>The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution</i> (New York: Morrow, 1970).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-35" id="ch7ft35">35</a>.</span>Fredric Jameson, <i>Valences of the Dialectic</i> (London: Verso, 2010), p. 413.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-36" id="ch7ft36">36</a>.</span>&#x2018;Marx alone sought to combine the politics of revolt with the &#x201C;poetry of the future&#x201D; and applied himself to demonstrate that socialism was more modern than capitalism and more productive. To recover that futurism and that excitement is surely the fundamental task of any left &#x201C;discursive struggle&#x201D; today.&#x2019; Fredric Jameson, <i>Representing Capital: A Reading of Volume One</i> (London: Verso, 2011), p. 90.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-37" id="ch7ft37">37</a>.</span>Fredric Jameson, <i>A Singular Modernity: Essay on the Ontology of the Present</i> (London: Verso, 2002), p. 8.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-38" id="ch7ft38">38</a>.</span>We can draw a distinction here between abstract and concrete utopias. Whereas the former project an image of the future unbound from current political conditions, the latter are guided by a rigorous analysis of the given conjuncture and aimed at intervention in the here and now. Alfred Schmidt, <i>The Concept of Nature in Marx</i> (London: Verso, 2014), p. 128; Ernst Bloch, <i>The Principle of Hope</i> (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-39" id="ch7ft39">39</a>.</span>George Young, <i>The Russian Cosmists: The Esoteric Futurism of Nikolai Fedorov and His Followers</i> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-40" id="ch7ft40">40</a>.</span>Richard Stites, &#x2018;Fantasy and Revolution: Alexander Bogdanov and the Origins of Bolshevik Science Fiction&#x2019;, in Bogdanov, <i>Red Star</i>, p. 15; Siddiqi, <i>Red Rockets&#x2019; Glare</i>, Chapter 4.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-41" id="ch7ft41">41</a>.</span>Erik Olin Wright, <i>Envisioning Real Utopias</i> (London: Verso, 2010), p. 23.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-42" id="ch7ft42">42</a>.</span>Jameson, <i>Singular Modernity</i>, p. 26; Vincent Geoghegan, <i>Utopianism and Marxism</i> (Oxford: Peter Lang, 2008), p. 16.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-43" id="ch7ft43">43</a>.</span>Zygmunt Bauman, <i>Socialism: The Active Utopia</i> (London: Routledge, 2011), p. 13.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_229"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-44" id="ch7ft44">44</a>.</span>Kilgore, <i>Astrofuturism</i>, pp. 237&#x2013;8; Stites, <i>Revolutionary Dreams</i>, p. 33.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-45" id="ch7ft45">45</a>.</span>Slavoj &#x017D;i&#x017E;ek, &#x2018;Towards a Materialist Theory of Subjectivity&#x2019;, Birkbeck, London, 22 May 2014, podcast available at <a href="http://backdoorbroadcasting.net">backdoorbroadcasting.net</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-46" id="ch7ft46">46</a>.</span>Weeks, <i>Problem with Work</i>, p. 204.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-47" id="ch7ft47">47</a>.</span>Ruth Levitas, <i>The Concept of Utopia</i> (Oxford: Peter Lang, 2011).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-48" id="ch7ft48">48</a>.</span>E. P. Thompson, &#x2018;Romanticism, Utopianism and Moralism: The Case of William Morris&#x2019;, <i>New Left Review</i> I/99 (September&#x2013;October 1976), p. 97.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-49" id="ch7ft49">49</a>.</span>The most condensed and interventionist form of this utopian dimension is the manifesto. See Weeks, <i>Problem with Work</i>, pp. 213&#x2013;18.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-50" id="ch7ft50">50</a>.</span>Manuel Castells, <i>Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in the Internet Age</i> (Cambridge: Polity, 2012), p. 15.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-51" id="ch7ft51">51</a>.</span>Patricia Reed, &#x2018;Seven Prescriptions for Accelerationism&#x2019;, in Robin Mackay and Armen Avanessian, eds, <i>#Accelerate: The Accelerationist Reader</i> (Falmouth: Urbanomic, 2014), pp. 528&#x2013;31.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-52" id="ch7ft52">52</a>.</span>Wendy Brown, &#x2018;Resisting Left Melancholy&#x2019;, <i>Boundary 2</i> 26: 3 (1999).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-53" id="ch7ft53">53</a>.</span>Paul Mason, <i>Why It&#x2019;s Kicking Off Everywhere: The New Global Revolutions</i> (London: Verso, 2012), pp. 66&#x2013;73.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-54" id="ch7ft54">54</a>.</span>Mark Fisher, &#x2018;Going Overground&#x2019;, <i>K-Punk</i>, 5 January 2014, at <a href="http://k-punk.org">k-punk.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-55" id="ch7ft55">55</a>.</span>Bloch, <i>Principle of Hope</i>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-56" id="ch7ft56">56</a>.</span>Paul Gilroy, <i>The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness</i> (London: Verso, 1993), p. 37; Weeks, <i>Problem with Work</i>, pp. 190&#x2013;3; Geoghegan, <i>Utopianism and Marxism</i>, p. 20.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-57" id="ch7ft57">57</a>.</span>Curiously, this lack of a profit motive has led some on the left to see space exploration perversely as a &#x2018;capitalist utopia&#x2019;. George Caffentzis and Silvia Federici, &#x2018;Mormons in Space&#x2019;, in George Caffentzis, <i>In Letters of Blood and Fire</i> (Oakland: PM Press, 2012), p. 65.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-58" id="ch7ft58">58</a>.</span>Louis Althusser, &#x2018;Ideology and Ideological State Apparatus (Notes Towards an Investigation)&#x2019;, in <i>Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays</i> (New York: Monthly Review, 2001), pp. 88&#x2013;9.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-59" id="ch7ft59">59</a>.</span>Gramsci, <i>Selections from the Prison Notebooks</i>, p. 10.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-60" id="ch7ft60">60</a>.</span>Mary Morgan and Malcolm Rutherford, &#x2018;American Economics: The Character of the Transformation&#x2019;, <i>History of Political Economy</i> 30 (1998).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-61" id="ch7ft61">61</a>.</span>G. C. Harcourt, <i>Some Cambridge Controversies in the Theory of Capital</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1972).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-62" id="ch7ft62">62</a>.</span>Paul A. Samuelson, &#x2018;Understanding the Marxian Notion of Exploitation: A Summary of the So-Called Transformation Problem Between Marxian Values and Competitive Prices&#x2019;, <i>Journal of Economic Literature</i> 9: 2 (1971).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-63" id="ch7ft63">63</a>.</span>Edward Fullbrook, &#x2018;Introduction&#x2019;, in Edward Fullbrook, ed., <i>Pluralist Economics</i> (London: Zed, 2008), pp. 1&#x2013;2.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-64" id="ch7ft64">64</a>.</span>More information can be found on their website: <a href="http://rethinkeconomics.org">rethinkeconomics.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-65" id="ch7ft65">65</a>.</span>David Colander and Harry Landreth, &#x2018;Pluralism, Formalism and American Economics&#x2019;, in Fullbrook, <i>Pluralist Economics</i>, pp. 31&#x2013;5.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-66" id="ch7ft66">66</a>.</span>The most dominant textbook is by Greg Mankiw, a former Bush lackey and courageous defender of the 1 per cent: N. Gregory Mankiw, <i>Macroeconomics</i>, 8th edn (New York: Worth, 2012).</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_230"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-67" id="ch7ft67">67</a>.</span>William Mitchell and L. Randall Wray, &#x2018;Modern Monetary Theory and Practice&#x2019;, 2014, pdf available at <a href="http://mmtonline.net">mmtonline.net</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-68" id="ch7ft68">68</a>.</span>For two brief but excellent exceptions, see Tiziana Terranova, &#x2018;Red Stack Attack!&#x2019;, in Mackay and Avanessian, <i>#Accelerate</i>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-69" id="ch7ft69">69</a>.</span>For some of the existing research on this topic, see Oskar Lange and Fred M. Taylor, <i>On the Economic Theory of Socialism</i> (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964); W. Paul Cockshott and Allin Cottrell, <i>Towards a New Socialism</i> (Nottingham: Spokesman, 1993); W. Paul Cockshott, Allin Cottrell, Gregory Michaelson, Ian Wright and Victor Yakovenko, <i>Classical Econophysics</i> (London: Routledge, 2009); Andy Pollack, &#x2018;Information Technology and Socialist Self-Management&#x2019;, <i>Monthly Review</i> 49: 4 (1997); Dan Greenwood, &#x2018;From Market to Non-Market: An Autonomous Agent Approach to Central Planning&#x2019;, <i>Knowledge Engineering Review</i> 22: 4 (2007).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-70" id="ch7ft70">70</a>.</span>There are already a number of economists working on these issues. The problem is hindered by the existence of multiple measures (many of which nonetheless reach similar conclusions about the cyclical and secular trends), and by studies remaining at the level of appearances and not digging deeper into the causal mechanisms behind them. There seems to be a correlation between increasing use of fixed capital in the production process and a long-term secular decline in profitability, but any causal connection so far remains at the level of assertion. For more, see Minqi Li, Feng Xiao and Andong Zhu, &#x2018;Long Waves, Institutional Changes, and Historical Trends: A Study of the Long-Term Movement of the Profit Rate in the Capitalist World-Economy&#x2019;, <i>Journal of World-Systems Research</i> 13: 1 (2007); Guglielmo Carchedi, <i>Behind the Crisis: Marx&#x2019;s Dialectic of Value and Knowledge</i> (Chicago: Haymarket, 2012); Deepankar Basu and Ramaa Vasudevan, &#x2018;Technology, Distribution and the Rate of Profit in the US Economy: Understanding the Current Crisis&#x2019;, <i>Cambridge Journal of Economics</i> 37: 1 (2013); Gerard Dumenil and Dominique Levy, &#x2018;The Profit Rate: Where and How Much Did It Fall? Did It Recover? (USA 1948&#x2013;2000)&#x2019;, <i>Review of Radical Political Economics</i> 34: 4 (2002).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-71" id="ch7ft71">71</a>.</span>Mary Morgan, <i>The World in the Model: How Economists Work and Think</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-72" id="ch7ft72">72</a>.</span>For more information, see <a href="http://wea.org.uk">wea.org.uk</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-73" id="ch7ft73">73</a>.</span>Andy Clark, <i>Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Action, and Cognitive Extension</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-74" id="ch7ft74">74</a>.</span>John Zerzan, <i>Future Primitive and Other Essays</i> (Brooklyn: Semiotext(e), 1996); Derrick Jensen, <i>Endgame: The Problem of Civilization, Volume 1</i> (New York: Seven Stories, 2006).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-75" id="ch7ft75">75</a>.</span>Gavin Mueller, &#x2018;The Rise of the Machines&#x2019;, <i>Jacobin</i> 10 (2013), at <a href="http://jacobinmag.com">jacobinmag.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-76" id="ch7ft76">76</a>.</span>This has been one of the main focuses of science and technology studies and feminist approaches to technology. For representative examples of this research, see Wajcman, <i>TechnoFeminism</i>; Wiebe Bijker, Thomas Hughes and Trevor Pinch, eds, <i>The Social Construction of Technological Systems</i> (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987); Wiebe Bijker, <i>Of Bicycles, Bakelites, and Bulbs: Toward a Theory of Sociotechnical Change</i> (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997); Donald MacKenzie, Fabian Muniesa and Lucia Siu, eds, <i>Do Economists Make Markets? On the</i> <a id="page_231"/><i>Performativity of Economics</i> (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007); Thomas Hughes, <i>Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880&#x2013;1930</i> (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-77" id="ch7ft77">77</a>.</span>This is the subject of recent debates over the &#x2018;reconfiguration thesis&#x2019;. Alberto Toscano, &#x2018;Logistics and Opposition&#x2019;, <i>Mute</i>, 2011, at <a href="http://metamute.org">metamute.org</a>; Jasper Bernes, &#x2018;Logistics, Counterlogistics and the Communist Project&#x2019;, in <i>End Notes 3: Gender, Race, Class and Other Misfortunes</i> (September 2013); Alberto Toscano, &#x2018;Lineaments of the Logistical State&#x2019;, <i>Viewpoint</i>, 2015, at <a href="http://viewpointmag.com">viewpointmag.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-78" id="ch7ft78">78</a>.</span>&#x2018;Machinery does not lose its use value as soon as it ceases to be capital. While machinery is the most appropriate form of the use value of fixed capital, it does not at all follow that therefore subsumption under the social relation of capital is the most appropriate and ultimate social relation of production for the application of machinery.&#x2019; Karl Marx, <i>Grundrisse: Introduction to the Critique of Political Economy</i>, transl. Martin Nicolaus (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1973), pp. 699&#x2013;700.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-79" id="ch7ft79">79</a>.</span>As the examples here will show, repurposing and creation are ultimately highly intertwined, given that every repurposing involves a creative use of old material, and every creation involves a repurposing of existing material to hand. The distinction between the two is ultimately a matter of emphasis rather than opposition.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-80" id="ch7ft80">80</a>.</span>Andrew Feenberg, <i>Transforming Technology: A Critical Theory Revisited</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-81" id="ch7ft81">81</a>.</span>For a series of useful guidelines for how workers can adopt technology into the workplace, see Chris Harman, <i>Is a Machine After Your Job? New Technology and the Struggle for Socialism</i> (London, 1979), at <a href="http://marxists.org">marxists.org</a>, Part 8.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-82" id="ch7ft82">82</a>.</span>Mariana Mazzucato, <i>The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking Public vs. Private Sector Myths</i> (London: Anthem, 2013); Michael Hanlon, &#x2018;The Golden Quarter&#x2019;, <i>Aeon Magazine</i>, 3 December 2014, at <a href="http://aeon.co">aeon.co</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-83" id="ch7ft83">83</a>.</span>For a detailed account of this, see Mazzucato, <i>Entrepreneurial State</i>, Chapter 5.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-84" id="ch7ft84">84</a>.</span>Mariana Mazzucato, <i>Building the Entrepreneurial State: A New Framework for Envisioning and Evaluating a Mission-Oriented Public Sector</i>, Working Paper No. 824, Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, 2015, pdf available at <a href="http://levyinstitute.org">levyinstitute.org</a>, p. 9; Carlota Perez, <i>Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital: The Dynamics of Bubbles and Golden Ages</i> (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2003).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-85" id="ch7ft85">85</a>.</span>Mazzucato, <i>Building the Entrepreneurial State</i>, p. 2.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-86" id="ch7ft86">86</a>.</span>For more, see <a href="http://missionorientedfinance.com">missionorientedfinance.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-87" id="ch7ft87">87</a>.</span>Caetano Penna and Mariana Mazzucato, &#x2018;Beyond Market Failures: The Role of State Investment Banks in the Economy&#x2019;, paper presented at the Conference on Mission-Oriented Finance for Innovation, London, 24 July 2014, available on <a href="http://youtube.com">youtube.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-88" id="ch7ft88">88</a>.</span>Germany&#x2019;s major transformation towards renewable energy provides perhaps the best current example of this.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-89" id="ch7ft89">89</a>.</span>Nick Dyer-Witheford, &#x2018;Cycles and Circuits of Struggle in High-Technology Capitalism&#x2019;, in Jim Davis, Thomas Hirschl and Michael Stack, eds, <i>Cutting Edge: Technology, Information, Capitalism and Social Revolution</i> (London: Verso, 1997), pp. 206&#x2013;7; Adrian Smith, <i>Socially Useful Production</i>, STEPS Working Paper 58 (Brighton STEPS Centre, 2014), at <a href="http://steps-centre.org">steps-centre.org</a>, p. 2.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_232"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-90" id="ch7ft90">90</a>.</span>This shares some properties with Murray Bookchin&#x2019;s notion of liberatory technologies, though we are obviously less inclined towards his vision of a small-scale communitarian future. Murray Bookchin, &#x2018;Towards a Liberatory Technology&#x2019;, in <i>Post-Scarcity Anarchism</i> (Edinburgh: AK Press, 2004).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-91" id="ch7ft91">91</a>.</span>Hilary Wainwright and Dave Elliott, <i>The Lucas Plan: A New Trade Unionism in the Making?</i> (London: Allison &#x0026; Busby, 1981), p. 16.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-92" id="ch7ft92">92</a>.</span>Ibid., pp. 10, 89.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-93" id="ch7ft93">93</a>.</span>Ibid., pp. 101&#x2013;7.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-94" id="ch7ft94">94</a>.</span>Smith, <i>Socially Useful Production</i>, p. 5.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-95" id="ch7ft95">95</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 1.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-96" id="ch7ft96">96</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 2.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-97" id="ch7ft97">97</a>.</span>Wainwright and Elliott, <i>Lucas Plan</i>, p. 231.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-98" id="ch7ft98">98</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 157.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-99" id="ch7ft99">99</a>.</span>Tiqqun, <i>The Cybernetic Hypothesis</i>, n.d., at <a href="http://theanarchistlibrary.org">theanarchistlibrary.org</a>.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-100" id="ch7ft100">100</a>.</span>Eden Medina, <i>Cybernetic Revolutionaries: Technology and Politics in Allende&#x2019;s Chile</i> (London: MIT Press, 2011), p. 26.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-101" id="ch7ft101">101</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 64.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-102" id="ch7ft102">102</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 72.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-103" id="ch7ft103">103</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 146.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-104" id="ch7ft104">104</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 150.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-105" id="ch7ft105">105</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 79.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-106" id="ch7ft106">106</a>.</span>Jameson, <i>Valences of the Dialectic</i>; Toscano, &#x2018;Logistics and Opposition&#x2019;; Mike Davis, &#x2018;Who Will Build the Ark?&#x2019;, <i>New Left Review</i> II/61 (January&#x2013;February 2010); Medina, <i>Cybernetic Revolutionaries</i>; Nick Dyer-Witheford, &#x2018;Red Plenty Platforms&#x2019;, <i>Culture Machine</i> 14 (2013); Terranova, &#x2018;Red Stack Attack!&#x2019;; Evgeny Morozov, &#x2018;Socialise the Data Centres!&#x2019; <i>New Left Review</i> 91 (January&#x2013;February 2015).</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-107" id="ch7ft107">107</a>.</span>For a sophisticated argument to the contrary, see Bernes, &#x2018;Logistics, Counterlogistics and the Communist Project&#x2019;.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-108" id="ch7ft108">108</a>.</span>For a compelling quasi-fictional account of these problems, see Spufford, <i>Red Plenty</i>.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-109" id="ch7ft109">109</a>.</span>Caroline Saunders and Andrew Barber, <i>Food Miles &#x2013; Comparative Energy/Emissions Performance of New Zealand&#x2019;s Agriculture Industry</i>, Agribusiness and Economics Research Unit, July 2006, pdf available at <a href="http://lincoln.ac.nz">lincoln.ac.nz</a>.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-110" id="ch7ft110">110</a>.</span>Feenberg, <i>Transforming Technology</i>, p. 58; Monika Reinfelder, &#x2018;Introduction: Breaking the Spell of Technicism&#x2019;, in Phil Slater, ed., <i>Outlines of a Critique of Technology</i> (London: Ink Links, 1980), p. 17.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-111" id="ch7ft111">111</a>.</span>There is an extensive literature on this political nature in the field of science and technology studies, but we would also add research on skill-biased and class-biased technical change. David Autor, Frank Levy and Richard Murnane, &#x2018;The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration&#x2019;, <i>Quarterly Journal of Economics</i> 118: 4 (2003); Amit Basole, &#x2018;Class-Biased Technical Change and Socialism: Some Reflections on Benedito Moraes-Neto&#x2019;s &#x201C;On the Labor Process and Productive Efficiency: Discussing the Socialist Project&#x201D;&#x2019;, <i>Rethinking Marxism</i> 25: 4 (2013).</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-112" id="ch7ft112">112</a>.</span>For one of the earliest arguments to this effect, see Raniero Panzieri, &#x2018;The Capitalist Use of Machinery: Marx Versus the &#x201C;Objectivists&#x201D;&#x2019;, in Slater, <i>Outlines of a Critique of Technology</i>.</p><p class="note"><a id="page_233"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-113" id="ch7ft113">113</a>.</span>David F. Noble, <i>Forces of Production: A Social History of Industrial Automation</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986); Karl Marx, <i>Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume I</i>, transl. Ben Fowkes (London: Penguin, 1990), p. 526.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-114" id="ch7ft114">114</a>.</span>Melvin Kranzberg, &#x2018;Technology and History: &#x2018;&#x2018;Kranzberg&#x2019;s Laws&#x201D;&#x2019;, <i>Technology and Culture</i> 27:3 (1986), p. 545.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-115" id="ch7ft115">115</a>.</span>George Basalla, <i>The Evolution of Technology</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), p. 7.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-116" id="ch7ft116">116</a>.</span>On how users shape technology, see Nellie Ooudshorn and Trevor Pinch, eds, <i>How Users Matter: The Co-Construction of Users and Technology</i> (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005).</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-117" id="ch7ft117">117</a>.</span>Harry Cleaver, &#x2018;Technology as Political Weaponry&#x2019;, in <i>The Responsibility of the Scientific and Technological Enterprise in Technology Transfer</i>, American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1981, pdf available at <a href="http://academia.edu">academia.edu</a>.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-118" id="ch7ft118">118</a>.</span>Even if never used, nuclear weapons are still fundamentally premised on this function.</p><p class="note"><span class="spacen1"><a href="13_Chapter7Gr9253igorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch7ft-119" id="ch7ft119">119</a>.</span>For an incisive reflection on cognitive workers and their relation to other figures of the working class, see Matteo Pasquinelli, &#x2018;To Anticipate and Accelerate: Italian Operaismo and Reading Marx&#x2019;s Notion of the Organic Composition of Capital&#x2019;, <i>Rethinking Marxism</i> 26: 2 (2014).</p><p class="sub"><b>8. BUILDING POWER</b></p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-1" id="ch8ft1">1</a>.</span>By &#x2018;power&#x2019;, we mean the capacity to bring about one&#x2019;s interests. Steven Lukes, <i>Power: A Radical View</i>, 2nd edn (Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-2" id="ch8ft2">2</a>.</span>John Holloway, <i>Change the World Without Taking Power: The Meaning of Revolution Today</i> (London/Sterling, VA: Pluto, 2002).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-3" id="ch8ft3">3</a>.</span>We focus on these three factors here, but there are undoubtedly numerous others &#x2013; not least, unpredictable elements like luck and individual vision.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-4" id="ch8ft4">4</a>.</span>In terms of traditional class struggle, this category includes associational power, marketplace bargaining power and workplace bargaining power. Beverly Silver, <i>Forces of Labor: Workers&#x2019; Movements and Globalization Since 1870</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), pp. 13&#x2013;16.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-5" id="ch8ft5">5</a>.</span>Indeed, the unique feature of class conflict under capitalism was argued to be its tendency to simplify the antagonism. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, &#x2018;The Communist Manifesto&#x2019;, in <i>Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, and the Communist Manifesto</i> (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1988), p. 210.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-6" id="ch8ft6">6</a>.</span>&#x2018;The Holding Pattern: The Ongoing Crisis and the Class Struggles of 2011&#x2013;2013&#x2019;, <i>Endnotes</i> 3 (2013), at <a href="http://endnotes.org.uk">endnotes.org.uk</a>, pp. 49&#x2013;50.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-7" id="ch8ft7">7</a>.</span>Frances Fox Piven and Richard Cloward, <i>Poor People&#x2019;s Movements: Why They Succeed, How They Fail</i> (New York: Random House, 1988), p. 194.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-8" id="ch8ft8">8</a>.</span>Marx and Engels, &#x2018;Communist Manifesto&#x2019;, pp. 217&#x2013;18.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-9" id="ch8ft9">9</a>.</span>As Beverly Silver reminds us, though, we should not assume that these tactics and leverage points were obvious from the beginning. They had to be invented and built up through practice and experimentation. Silver, <i>Forces of Labor</i>, p. 6.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_234"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-10" id="ch8ft10">10</a>.</span>&#x2018;Editorial&#x2019;, <i>Endnotes</i> 3 (2013), p. 7.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-11" id="ch8ft11">11</a>.</span>G&#x00F6;ran Therborn, &#x2018;New Masses? Social Bases of Resistance&#x2019;, <i>New Left Review</i> II/85 (January&#x2013;February 2014), p. 9.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-12" id="ch8ft12">12</a>.</span>Ching Kwan Lee, <i>Against the Law: Labor Protests in China&#x2019;s Rustbelt and Sunbelt</i> (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2007); Kevin Hamlin, Ilya Gridneff and William Davison, &#x2018;Ethiopia Becomes China&#x2019;s China in Global Search for Cheap Labor&#x2019;, <i>Business Week</i>, 22 July 2014.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-13" id="ch8ft13">13</a>.</span>Silvia Federici, <i>Caliban and the Witch: Women, the Body and Primitive Accumulation</i> (New York: Autonomedia, 2004), pp. 63&#x2013;4; Zak Cope, <i>Divided World, Divided Class: Global Political Economy and the Stratification of Labour Under Capitalism</i> (Montreal: Kersplebedeb, 2012).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-14" id="ch8ft14">14</a>.</span>To give just a sample of how this topic has been broached, we can point to the problem of building the common, the problem of articulating a hegemony, the problem of the party, the problem of composition and the problem of framing. See, respectively, Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, <i>Multitude: War and Democracy in the Age of Empire</i> (New York: Penguin, 2005); Ernesto Laclau, <i>On Populist Reason</i> (London: Verso, 2007); Jodi Dean, <i>The Communist Horizon</i> (London: Verso, 2012); &#x2018;The Holding Pattern&#x2019;; Sidney Tarrow, <i>Power in Movement: Social Movements and Contentious Politics</i>, 2nd edn (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-15" id="ch8ft15">15</a>.</span>Badiou, for example, offers a critique of the tendency of minimal rights to reduce the human down to its animalistic basis. Alain Badiou, <i>Ethics: An Essay on the Understanding of Evil</i>, transl. Peter Hallward (London: Verso, 2002), pp. 11&#x2013;13.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-16" id="ch8ft16">16</a>.</span>Anna Feigenbaum, Fabian Frenzel and Patrick McCurdy, <i>Protest Camps</i> (London: Zed, 2013), p. 176.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-17" id="ch8ft17">17</a>.</span>In more classical language, we might say that objectivite unity is faced with subjective plurality.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-18" id="ch8ft18">18</a>.</span>While populist movements are often set in opposition to class movements, it is more accurate to say that populist movements <i>encompass</i> class movements. As Laclau argues, what populism denies is not class struggle, but instead the ahistorical necessity of class struggle as the only motor of social change. But within a populist movement, certain struggles can be more relevant than others, and under contemporary conditions of surplus populations, we believe class is again emerging as the dominant &#x2013; though repressed &#x2013; locus of struggle of our times. As understood here, populism therefore expresses a connective logic rather than a specific content. The &#x2018;people&#x2019; is therefore not a subject, nor a substantial entity, but an emergent collective formed by a particular logic of connection. Linda Zerilli, &#x2018;This Universalism Which Is Not One&#x2019;, <i>Diacritics</i> 28: 2 (1998); Laclau, <i>On Populist Reason</i>, p. 236.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-19" id="ch8ft19">19</a>.</span>For a useful genealogy of the changing valence of &#x2018;populism&#x2019;, see Marco D&#x2019;Eramo, &#x2018;Populism and the New Oligarchy&#x2019;, transl. Gregory Elliot, <i>New Left Review</i> II/82 (July&#x2013;August 2013).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-20" id="ch8ft20">20</a>.</span>Laclau, <i>On Populist Reason</i>, p. 117.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-21" id="ch8ft21">21</a>.</span>Yannis Stavrakakis and Giorgos Katsambekis, &#x2018;Left-Wing Populism in the European Periphery: The Case of Syriza&#x2019;, <i>Journal of Political Ideologies</i> 19: 2 (2014); Pablo Iglesias, &#x2018;The Left Can Win&#x2019;, <i>Jacobin</i>, 9 December 2014, at <a href="http://jacobinmag.com">jacobinmag.com</a>; Dan Hancox, &#x2018;Why Ernesto Laclau Is the Intellectual Figurehead for Syriza and <a id="page_235"/>Podemos&#x2019;, <i>Guardian</i>, 9 February 2015; Laclau, <i>On Populist Reason</i>; George Ciccariello-Maher, <i>We Created Chavez: A People&#x2019;s History of the Venezuelan Revolution</i> (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2013).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-22" id="ch8ft22">22</a>.</span>Ernesto Laclau, &#x2018;Why Constructing a People Is the Main Task of Radical Politics&#x2019;, <i>Critical Inquiry</i> 32: 4 (2006), p. 655.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-23" id="ch8ft23">23</a>.</span>Enrique Dussel, <i>Twenty Theses on Politics</i>, transl. George Ciccariello-Maher (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2009), p. 83.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-24" id="ch8ft24">24</a>.</span>For example, the <i>Wall Street Journal</i> estimated that anyone in the United States earning under $500,000 would be in the 99 per cent. It would be difficult to imagine that many earning a little under that were aligned with the project expressed by Occupy Wall Street. See Phil Izzo, &#x2018;What Percent Are You?&#x2019;, <i>WSJ Blogs &#x2013; Real Time Economics</i>, 19 October 2011, at <a href="http://blogs.wsj.com">blogs.wsj.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-25" id="ch8ft25">25</a>.</span>Referring back to the discussion of universalism in Chapter 4, this is the way in which universalism becomes contaminated with the particular, and vice versa.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-26" id="ch8ft26">26</a>.</span>Therborn, &#x2018;New Masses?&#x2019;, pp. 8&#x2013;9.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-27" id="ch8ft27">27</a>.</span>Bertie Russell, &#x2018;Demanding the Future? What a Demand Can Do&#x2019;, <i>Journal of Aesthetics and Protest</i>, 2014, at <a href="http://joaap.org">joaap.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-28" id="ch8ft28">28</a>.</span>Ben Trott, &#x2018;Walking in the Right Direction?&#x2019;, <i>Turbulence</i> 1 (2007), at <a href="http://turbulence.org.uk">turbulence.org.uk</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-29" id="ch8ft29">29</a>.</span>This also has resonances with what Plan C has called a &#x2018;community of reference&#x2019;. Russell, &#x2018;Demanding the Future?&#x2019;.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-30" id="ch8ft30">30</a>.</span>Tiziana Terranova, &#x2018;Red Stack Attack!&#x2019;, in Robin Mackay and Armen Avanessian, eds, <i>#Accelerate: The Accelerationist Reader</i> (Falmouth: Urbanomic, 2014), p. 387.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-31" id="ch8ft31">31</a>.</span>William K. Carroll, &#x2018;Hegemony, Counter-Hegemony, Anti-Hegemony&#x2019;, <i>Socialist Studies/&#x00C9;tudes Socialistes</i> 2: 2 (2006), pp. 30&#x2013;2; Richard Day, <i>Gramsci Is Dead: Anarchist Currents in the Newest Social Movements</i> (London: Pluto, 2005).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-32" id="ch8ft32">32</a>.</span>David Harvey, <i>Rebel Cities: From the Right to the City to the Urban Revolution</i> (London: Verso, 2013), p. 125.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-33" id="ch8ft33">33</a>.</span>The Free Association, &#x2018;Rock &#x2019;n&#x2019; Roll Suicide: Political Organisation in Post-Crisis UK&#x2019;, <i>Freely Associating</i>, n.d., at <a href="http://freelyassociating.org">freelyassociating.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-34" id="ch8ft34">34</a>.</span>For a discussion of &#x2018;vanguard functions&#x2019;, see Rodrigo Nunes, <i>Organisation of the Organisationless: Collective Action After Networks</i> (London: Mute, 2014), pp. 34&#x2013;40.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-35" id="ch8ft35">35</a>.</span>For an argument about the importance of multiple organizational forms, see Tarrow, <i>Power in Movement</i>, Chapter 8.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-36" id="ch8ft36">36</a>.</span>Carroll, &#x2018;Hegemony, Counter-Hegemony, Anti-Hegemony&#x2019;, p. 22.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-37" id="ch8ft37">37</a>.</span>Nunes, <i>Organisation of the Organisationless</i>, p. 30.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-38" id="ch8ft38">38</a>.</span>This is what is termed a &#x2018;network-system&#x2019; by Rodrigo Nunes. Ibid., p. 20. Nunes&#x2019;s work also highlights an important area for more research &#x2013; namely, a comparative network topology of movements. In this endeavour, the mathematical tools of graph theory will be indispensable.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-39" id="ch8ft39">39</a>.</span>Brian Steensland, <i>The Failed Welfare Revolution: America&#x2019;s Struggle over Guaranteed Income Policy</i> (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007), p. 22.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-40" id="ch8ft40">40</a>.</span>Henry Farrell and Cosma Shalizi, &#x2018;Cognitive Democracy&#x2019;, <i>Crooked Timber</i>, 23 May 2012, at <a href="http://crookedtimber.org">crookedtimber.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-41" id="ch8ft41">41</a>.</span>Zeynep Tufekci, &#x2018;After the Protests&#x2019;, <i>New York Times</i>, 19 March 2014.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_236"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-42" id="ch8ft42">42</a>.</span>Manuel Castells, <i>Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in the Internet Age</i> (Cambridge: Polity, 2012), pp. 34&#x2013;5.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-43" id="ch8ft43">43</a>.</span>Jane McAlevey, <i>Raising Expectations (and Raising Hell): My Decade Fighting for the Labor Movement</i> (London: Verso, 2014), p. 312.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-44" id="ch8ft44">44</a>.</span>Steensland, <i>Failed Welfare Revolution</i>, p. 230.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-45" id="ch8ft45">45</a>.</span>Roger Simon, <i>Gramsci&#x2019;s Political Thought</i> (London: Lawrence &#x0026; Wishart, 1991), Chapter 12.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-46" id="ch8ft46">46</a>.</span>Antonio Gramsci, <i>Selections from the Prison Notebooks</i>, ed. Quintin Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell-Smith (London: Lawrence &#x0026; Wishart, 1971), pp. 5&#x2013;6.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-47" id="ch8ft47">47</a>.</span>SomeAngryWorkers, &#x2018;Gr***ford? Where the Hell&#x2019;s That?!&#x2019;, <i>Libcom</i>, 14 September 2014, at <a href="http://libcom.org">libcom.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-48" id="ch8ft48">48</a>.</span>McAlevey, <i>Raising Expectations</i>, p. 37.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-49" id="ch8ft49">49</a>.</span>This is what has been called &#x2018;whole-worker organising&#x2019;. See ibid., pp. 14&#x2013;16.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-50" id="ch8ft50">50</a>.</span>Erik Olin Wright, <i>Envisioning Real Utopias</i> (London: Verso, 2010), p. 223.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-51" id="ch8ft51">51</a>.</span>Alain Badiou, <i>The Rebirth of History: Times of Riots and Uprisings</i> (London: Verso, 2012), p. 30.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-52" id="ch8ft52">52</a>.</span>Harvey, <i>Rebel Cities</i>, p. 132.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-53" id="ch8ft53">53</a>.</span>McAlevey, <i>Raising Expectations</i>, p. 51.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-54" id="ch8ft54">54</a>.</span>Bill Fletcher and Fernando Gapasin, <i>Solidarity Divided: The Crisis in Organized Labor and a New Path Toward Social Justice</i> (London: University of California Press, 2009), p. 174.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-55" id="ch8ft55">55</a>.</span>Guy Standing, <i>The Precariat: The New Dangerous Class</i> (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2011), p. 1.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-56" id="ch8ft56">56</a>.</span>Steven Greenhouse, &#x2018;The Nation: The $100,000 Longshoreman; A Union Wins the Global Game&#x2019;, <i>New York Times</i>, 6 October 2002.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-57" id="ch8ft57">57</a>.</span>Nina Power has recently suggested that UBI should be a global demand, rather than a national demand. While in agreement in principle, we believe current political conditions make it inevitable that these demands will have to first pass through individual states. Nina Power, &#x2018;Re-Engineering the Future,&#x2019; presented at <i>Re-Engineering the Future</i>, Tate Britain, London, UK, 10 April 2015.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-58" id="ch8ft58">58</a>.</span>In recent years it has been common to argue that there is a crisis of the party-form, yet these announcements overlook the ways in which the party-form has been continually reinvented as conditions have changed. In simple terms, we can say there has been a breakdown of the vanguard party and the social democratic party. The former is predicated on a small elite group of intellectuals telling the masses what their interests are and inciting them to revolution. Lars T. Lih, <i>Lenin Rediscovered: &#x2018;What Is to Be Done?&#x2019; in Context</i> (Chicago: Haymarket, 2008), pp. 13&#x2013;18. The latter, on the other hand, is predicated on mass support, electoral politics, an independent financial base and a central position in a network of traditional workers&#x2019; organisations. Gerassimos Moschonas, <i>In the Name of Social Democracy: The Great Transformation, 1945 to the Present</i>, transl. Gregory Elliott (London: Verso, 2002), p. 35. Both are unfit for contemporary conditions in the advanced capitalist countries, but we believe the Gramscian concept of the party as a modern Prince may hold value and help to clarify the structure of a party like Podemos. A full discussion of the party would go beyond what can be included <a id="page_237"/>here, but we follow Peter Thomas in seeing this party as (1) only one section of a broader populist movement; (2) a form of self-governance of the movement; (3) an organisation that institutionalises difference rather than imposing identity; and (4) an organisation that can both synthesise the movement&#x2019;s demands and act as an experimental apparatus to lead it. Peter Thomas, &#x2018;The Communist Hypothesis and the Question of Organization&#x2019;, <i>Theory &#x0026; Event</i> 16: 4 (2013), at <a href="http://muse.jhu.edu">muse.jhu.edu</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-59" id="ch8ft59">59</a>.</span>Dario Azzellini, &#x2018;The Communal State: Communal Councils, Communes, and Workplace Democracy&#x2019;, <i>North American Congress on Latin America</i>, Summer 2013, at <a href="http://nacla.org">nacla.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-60" id="ch8ft60">60</a>.</span>Dan Hancox, &#x2018;Podemos: The Radical Party Turning Spanish Politics on Its Head&#x2019;, <i>Newsweek</i>, 22 October 2014.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-61" id="ch8ft61">61</a>.</span>Specifically, in the case of Podemos these include &#x2018;open citizen primaries, the constitution and proliferation of the circles, the editing and approval of a participative programme, collective funding, transparent accounting, agreement on the revocability of roles, the limitation of mandates and salaries of representatives&#x2019;. Germ&#x00E1;n Cano, Jorge Lago, Eduardo Maura, Pablo Bustinduy and Jorge Moruno, &#x2018;Podemos: Overcoming Representation&#x2019;, <i>Cunning Hired Knaves</i>, 31 May 2014, at <a href="http://hiredknaves.wordpress.com">hiredknaves.wordpress.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-62" id="ch8ft62">62</a>.</span>There is, however, much internal debate within Podemos about the direction in which the movement should move forward. Broadly, we can distinguish between those who appear to want more state-based and centralized power, and those who want more power delegated to decentralized and local social movements. See Luke Stobart, &#x2018;Understanding Podemos (2/3): Radical Populism&#x2019;, <i>Left Flank</i>, 14 November 2014, at <a href="http://left-flank.org">left-flank.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-63" id="ch8ft63">63</a>.</span>Gary Genosko, <i>The Party Without Bosses: Lessons on Anti-Capitalism from F&#x00E9;lix Guattari and Lu&#x00ED;s In&#x00E1;cio &#x2018;Lula&#x2019; Da Silva</i> (Winnipeg: Arbeiter Ring, 2003), p. 19.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-64" id="ch8ft64">64</a>.</span>Ciccariello-Maher, <i>We Created Chavez</i>, p. 16.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-65" id="ch8ft65">65</a>.</span>Mark Levinson, <i>The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the World Smaller and the World Economy Bigger</i> (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2008), p. 10.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-66" id="ch8ft66">66</a>.</span>Ibid., p. 27.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-67" id="ch8ft67">67</a>.</span>Silver, <i>Forces of Labor</i>, p. 47.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-68" id="ch8ft68">68</a>.</span>Timothy Mitchell, <i>Carbon Democracy: Political Power in the Age of Oil</i> (London: Verso, 2013), p. 19.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-69" id="ch8ft69">69</a>.</span>Ashok Kumar, &#x2018;5 Reasons the Strike in China Is Terrifying! (to Transnational Capitalism)&#x2019;, <i>Novara Wire</i>, April 2014, at <a href="http://wire.novaramedia.com">wire.novaramedia.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-70" id="ch8ft70">70</a>.</span>SomeAngryWorkers, &#x2018;Gr***ford?&#x2019;.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-71" id="ch8ft71">71</a>.</span>Deborah Cowen, <i>The Deadly Life of Logistics: Mapping Violence in Global Trade</i> (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press), pp. 41&#x2013;5.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-72" id="ch8ft72">72</a>.</span>This is what is described by Erik Olin Wright as a type of structural power. Erik Olin Wright, &#x2018;Working-Class Power, Capitalist-Class Interests, and Class Compromise&#x2019;, <i>American Journal of Sociology</i> 105: 4 (2000), p. 962.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-73" id="ch8ft73">73</a>.</span>Jonathan Cutler and Stanley Aronowitz, &#x2018;Quitting Time&#x2019;, in Stanley Aronowitz and Jonathan Cutler, eds, <i>Post-Work: The Wages of Cybernation</i> (New York: Routledge, 1998), pp. 9&#x2013;11.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_238"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-74" id="ch8ft74">74</a>.</span>Cynthia Cockburn, <i>Brothers: Male Dominance and Technological Change</i> (London: Pluto, 1991).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-75" id="ch8ft75">75</a>.</span>McAlevey, <i>Raising Expectations</i>, p. 28.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-76" id="ch8ft76">76</a>.</span>Cutler and Aronowitz, &#x2018;Quitting Time&#x2019;, p. 17.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-77" id="ch8ft77">77</a>.</span>Ibid., pp. 12&#x2013;13; Noam Chomsky, <i>Occupy</i> (London: Penguin, 2012), p. 34.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-78" id="ch8ft78">78</a>.</span>Murray Wardrop, &#x2018;Boris Johnson Pledges to Introduce Driverless Tube Trains Within Two Years&#x2019;, <i>Daily Telegraph</i>, 28 February 2012.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-79" id="ch8ft79">79</a>.</span>Paul Einzig, <i>The Economic Consequences of Automation</i> (New York: W. W. Norton, 1957), p. 235.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-80" id="ch8ft80">80</a>.</span>David Autor, <i>Polanyi&#x2019;s Paradox and the Shape of Employment Growth</i>, Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, September 2014, at <a href="http://nber.org">nber.org</a>, p. 26.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-81" id="ch8ft81">81</a>.</span>Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski and Jeff Clune, &#x2018;Deep Neural Networks Are Easily Fooled: High Confidence Predictions for Unrecognizable Images&#x2019;, <i>arXiv</i>, 2015, at <a href="http://arxiv.org">arxiv.org</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-82" id="ch8ft82">82</a>.</span>A classic resource here is Piven and Cloward, <i>Poor People&#x2019;s Movements</i>. See also Liz Mason-Deese, &#x2018;The Neighborhood Is the New Factory&#x2019;, <i>Viewpoint</i> 2 (2012), at <a href="http://viewpointmag.com">viewpointmag.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-83" id="ch8ft83">83</a>.</span>Day, <i>Gramsci Is Dead</i>, p. 42.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-84" id="ch8ft84">84</a>.</span>Jael Vizcarra and Troy Andreas Araiza Kokinis, &#x2018;Freeway Takeovers: The Reemergence of the Collective Through Urban Disruption&#x2019;, <i>Tropics of Meta: Historiography for the Masses</i>, 5 December 2014, at <a href="http://tropicsofmeta.wordpress.com">tropicsofmeta.wordpress.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-85" id="ch8ft85">85</a>.</span>For instance, in order to uncover the effects of a West Coast port stoppage, a general equilibrium model has been used to forecast the effects for individual industries, along with the impacts from items like perishable goods and rerouted goods. The model further disaggregates these effects into impacts on exports, imports and consumer purchasing power, pinpointing the precise targets of any political pressure exerted through a blockade. &#x2018;The National Impact of a West Coast Port Stoppage&#x2019;, National Association of Manufacturers and the National Retail Federation, June 2014, pdf available at <a href="http://nam.org">nam.org</a>, p. 9.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-86" id="ch8ft86">86</a>.</span>See, for example, the development of new forms of organising around logistics networks. Jane Slaughter, &#x2018;Supply Chain Workers Test Strength of Links&#x2019;, <i>Labor Notes</i>, April 2012.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="14_Chapter8Grigo7562rMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#ch8ft-87" id="ch8ft87">87</a>.</span>McAlevey, <i>Raising Expectations</i>, p. 37.</p><p class="sub"><b>CONCLUSION</b></p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-1" id="conft1">1</a>.</span>This is a point implied by Marx when he writes that &#x2018;the realm of freedom actually <i>begins</i> only where labour which is determined by necessity and mundane considerations ceases&#x2019;. Karl Marx, <i>Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume III</i> (London: Lawrence &#x0026; Wishart, 1977). Emphasis added.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-2" id="conft2">2</a>.</span>The tenacity of the gendered division of society is amply demonstrated in Maria Mies, <i>Patriarchy and Accumulation on a World Scale: Women in the International Division of Labour</i> (London: Zed, 1999).</p><p class="note1"><a id="page_239"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-3" id="conft3">3</a>.</span>Kathi Weeks, <i>The Problem with Work: Feminism, Marxism, Antiwork Politics, and Postwork Imaginaries</i> (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011), p. 216.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-4" id="conft4">4</a>.</span>Robert J. Van Der Veen and Philippe Van Parijs, &#x2018;A Capitalist Road to Communism&#x2019;, <i>Theory and Society</i> 15: 5 (1986), p. 637.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-5" id="conft5">5</a>.</span>Gregory N. Mandel and James Thuo Gathii, &#x2018;Cost-Benefit Analysis Versus the Precautionary Principle: Beyond Cass Sunstein&#x2019;s Laws of Fear&#x2019;, <i>University of Illinois Law Review</i> 5 (2006).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-6" id="conft6">6</a>.</span>For an essential meditation on this, see Benedict Singleton, &#x2018;Maximum Jailbreak&#x2019;, in Robin Mackay and Armen Avanessian, eds, <i>#Accelerate: The Accelerationist Reader</i> (Falmouth: Urbanomic, 2014).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-7" id="conft7">7</a>.</span>Paul Mason, &#x2018;What Would Keynes Do?&#x2019;, <i>New Statesman</i>, 12 June 2014.</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-8" id="conft8">8</a>.</span>Singleton, &#x2018;Maximum Jailbreak&#x2019;; Nikolai Federovich Federov, &#x2018;The Philosophy of the Common Task&#x2019;, in <i>What Was Man Created For?</i>, transl. Elisabeth Kouitaissof and Marilyn Minto (London: Honeyglen, 1990).</p><p class="note1"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-9" id="conft9">9</a>.</span>For an accessible articulation of this position, see W. Brian Arthur, <i>The Nature of Technology: What It Is and How It Evolves</i> (London: Penguin, 2009).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-10" id="conft10">10</a>.</span>Tony Smith, &#x2018;Red Innovation&#x2019;, <i>Jacobin</i> 17 (2015), p. 75.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-11" id="conft11">11</a>.</span>Mariana Mazzucato, Erik Brynjolfsson and Michael Osborne, &#x2018;Robot Panel&#x2019;, presented at the FT Camp Alphaville, London, 15 July 2014, available at <a href="http://youtube.com">youtube.com</a>.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-12" id="conft12">12</a>.</span>Michael Hanlon, &#x2018;The Golden Quarter&#x2019;, <i>Aeon Magazine</i>, 3 December 2014, at <a href="http://aeon.co">aeon.co</a>; Tyler Cowen, <i>The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All the Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern History, Got Sick, and Will (Eventually) Feel Better</i> (New York: Dutton, 2011), p. 13.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-13" id="conft13">13</a>.</span>This is one of the primary conclusions of Mariana Mazzucato&#x2019;s important book <i>The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking Public vs. Private Sector Myths</i> (London: Anthem, 2013).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-14" id="conft14">14</a>.</span>For a lengthy analysis of how Apple cynically deployed state-developed technologies to build the iPhone, see ibid., Chapter 5.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-15" id="conft15">15</a>.</span>The fact that so many megaprojects continue to go ahead despite their history of cost overruns and lack of profitability is deemed a paradox by one study: Bent Flyvbjerg, Nils Bruzelius and Werner Rothengatter, <i>Megaprojects and Risk: An Anatomy of Ambition</i> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), pp. 3&#x2013;5.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-16" id="conft16">16</a>.</span>Andr&#x00E9; Gorz, <i>Paths to Paradise: On the Liberation from Work</i>, transl. Malcolm Imrie (Boston, MA: South End, 1985), p. 61.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-17" id="conft17">17</a>.</span>As Marx and Engels write, &#x2018;this development of productive forces &#x2026; is an absolutely necessary practical premise because without it privation, <i>want</i> is merely made general, and with <i>want</i> the struggle for necessities would begin again, and all the old filthy business would necessarily be restored&#x2019;. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, <i>The German Ideology</i> (London: Prometheus, 1976), p. 54.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-18" id="conft18">18</a>.</span>This appeal to a humanity outside of capitalism is one of the more problematic aspects of Jacques Camatte&#x2019;s work, for instance. See Jacques Camatte, <i>This World We Must Leave</i> (Brooklyn: (Semiotexte), 1996).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-19" id="conft19">19</a>.</span>Weeks, <i>Problem with Work</i>, p. 169.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-20" id="conft20">20</a>.</span>Ernest Mandel, <i>Late Capitalism</i> (London: Verso, 1998), pp. 394&#x2013;5.</p><p class="note2"><a id="page_240"/><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-21" id="conft21">21</a>.</span>Translation slightly modified &#x2013; from &#x2018;human energy&#x2019; to &#x2018;human powers&#x2019;. Marx, <i>Capital, Volume III</i>, p. 820.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-22" id="conft22">22</a>.</span>Federico Campagna, <i>The Last Night: Anti-Work, Atheism, Adventure</i> (Winchester: Zero, 2013), p. 68.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-23" id="conft23">23</a>.</span>For some investigations into what these could look like, however, see Alexandra Kollontai, <i>Selected Writings</i>, transl. Alix Holt (London: Allison &#x0026; Busby, 1977).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-24" id="conft24">24</a>.</span>Stephen Eric Bronner, <i>Reclaiming the Enlightenment: Toward a Politics of Radical Engagement</i> (New York: Columbia University Press, 2004), p. 15.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-25" id="conft25">25</a>.</span>Weeks, <i>Problem with Work</i>, p. 103.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-26" id="conft26">26</a>.</span>Benjamin Bratton, <i>The Stack: On Software and Sovereignty</i> (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2015).</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-27" id="conft27">27</a>.</span>Tiziana Terranova, &#x2018;Red Stack Attack!&#x2019;, in Robin Mackay and Armen Avanessian, eds, <i>#Accelerate: The Accelerationist Reader</i> (Falmouth: Urbanomic, 2014), pp. 391&#x2013;3.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-28" id="conft28">28</a>.</span>Accounts of daily life under participatory economics make for sobering reading. See Michael Albert, <i>Parecon: Life After Capitalism</i> (London: Verso, 2004), Part 3.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-29" id="conft29">29</a>.</span>Nick Dyer-Witheford, &#x2018;Red Plenty Platforms&#x2019;, <i>Culture Machine</i> 14 (2013), p. 13.</p><p class="note2"><span class="spacen1"><a href="15_ConclusionG1969rigorMalogrigormalogmailcom.xhtml#conft-30" id="conft30">30</a>.</span>Measured in terms of floating operations per second, the difference between 1969 and what is expected by 2019 is 10<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#conft7" id="conft-7"><sup>7</sup></a> versus 10<a href="16_NotesGrigorMalogrigormalogmail8570com.xhtml#conft18" id="conft-18"><sup>18</sup></a>. Ibid., p. 8.</p></div><p style="font-size: 11px; text-align: center; color: #666; border-top: 1px solid #9a9a9a; padding: 15px 0 0; margin: 50px 0 0;">This eBook is licensed to Grigor Malo, grigormalo@gmail.com on 03/31/2016</p></body></html>
